WELCOME
TO THE WEDNESDAY SEPTEMBER 17
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE ELECTRONIC
MEETING OF THE ANN ARBOR
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION THIS
MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT A SIMILARLY TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENTS WILL BE VIA
TELEPHONE OR IS ONLY TO SPEAK
DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC COMING
OPPORTUNITIES.
PLEASE CALL EIGHT THREE THREE
FIVE FOUR EIGHT ZERO TO EIGHT
TO AND ENTER THE MEETING ID
NUMBER NINE SIX SIX TWO FOUR
EIGHT EIGHT NINE FOUR FIVE
EIGHT OR JOIN VIA THE ZOOME
LINK.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLISHED
AGENDA IN THE PUBLIC NOTICE A
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
ON THE BROADCAST OF THIS
MEETING HOPEFULLY ON CHANNEL 16
.
>> ARIANNA IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO
NOW CALL ROBUST SURE THING I
WILL NOW CALL ROLL PLEASE SAY
HERE AND FROM WHERE YOU WERE
DIALING IN WHEN YOUR NAME IS
CALLED COUNCIL MEMBER ACKMANN
HERE ANN COMMISSIONER CARPENTER
OK COMMISSIONER CONAWAY HERE
AND OUR COMMISSIONER DUNLAP
HERE ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER
FLEW ALONG HERE ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER HOT TOMOKI DURING
LAGA COMMISSIONER HOLC HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER
JACOBSSON HERE ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER KEILLER
COMMISSIONER LEIGH HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR.
UH, COMMISSIONER ZECA, YOU'RE
ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER
HUTCHINSON HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
,COMMISSIONER MARGOLIS,
COMMISSIONER MCCREEDY HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR.
>> COMMISSIONER ETRANGER I AM
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR BUT I DON'T
THINK THAT MY COMMISSIONER
ANYMORE.
>> OKAY, COMMISSIONER, YOU'RE
FROM PITTSFIELD TOWNSHIP.
NAJRAN AND COMMISSIONER STUKA
OK.
AND THEN COMMISSIONER KEELER
OK, I BELIEVE THAT IS EVERYONE
ALL RIGHT?
WE HAVE A QUORUM.
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS TONIGHT ON
THE CONSENT AGENDA APPROVAL
OF THE AGENDA AND APPROVAL
OF THE MINUTES OF FROM OUR
PREVIOUS MEETING.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSENT AGENDA SEEING NONE.
IS THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE CONSENT AGENDA AS PRESENTED
BY ONE WAS SECONDED BY OTHERS
IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION?
PLEASE SAY YES OR RAISE YOUR
HAND ALL THOSE OPPOSED PLEASE
SAY RAISE YOUR HAND THE CAN
AGENDA IS APPROVED.
NEXT UP IS THE PUBLIC PORTION.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PEOPLE TO SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE
MINUTES AGAIN PLEASE CALL EIGHT
THREE THREE FIVE FOUR EIGHT
ZERO TWO EIGHT TWO AND ENTER
THE MEETING ID NUMBER NINE SIX
SIX TWO FOUR EIGHT NINE FOUR
FIVE EIGHT OR CONNECT VIA ZOOM
AS DESCRIBED ON THE AGENDA CITY
STAFF LISELOTTE
THEY HAVE
RAISED THEIR HAND ONE BY ONE
USE IN THE LAST THREE DIGITS
OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR THE
PERSONS MIND IN ORDER TO
ELECTRONICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND
TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
SPEAK PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON
YOUR PHONE OR SELECT THE HIT
RAISE YOUR HAND BUTTON AND ZOOM
IN AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT THAT
THE HOST IS ALLOWING YOU TO
SPEAK WHEN SPEAKING PLEASE MOVE
TO A QUIET AREA MUTE ANY
TELEVISION OR BACKGROUND SOUND
SO THAT I CAN HEAR YOU CLEARLY.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME THE NAME
AT THE BEGINNING OF YOUR
COMMENTS.
ARIANA, DO WE HAVE ANY MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC WHO WISH TO SPEAK
TO ME?
>> YES, IT LOOKS LIKE WE HAVE A
FEW IN OUR QUEUE HERE SO I WILL
START WITH THE NUMBER SO I'M
GOING TO BE TRANSFERRING OVER
SO THAT YOU CAN SPEAK YOU WILL
BE ALLOWED THREE MINUTES AND I
WILL GIVE YOU A THIRTY SECOND
WARNING BUT BEFORE YOUR TIME IS
UP.
HELLO CAN YOU HEAR ME?
>> YES WE CAN HEAR YOU ALL
RIGHT.
HELLO THIS IS FINBAR CONROY
MARCHIN CALLING FROM DEXTER,
RHODE.
>> I HAVE SOME CONCERNS WITH
THE DEXTER SIDEWALK PROJECT.
I BELIEVE THAT THE DESIGN IS
POORLY IMPLEMENTED AND GOES TOO
CLOSE TO RESIDENTS HOMES AND
DESTROYS MUCH OF THE
LANDSCAPING AND TREES ALONG THE
ROAD.
WE NEED TO REDUCE THE SPEED
LIMIT ON DEXTER ROAD CARS
FREQUENTLY TRAVEL DOUBLE THE
SPEED LIMIT.
IT IS VERY UNSAFE BUT THE
CURRENT SIDEWALK DESIGN IS NOT
A SOLUTION EITHER.
PLEASE CONSIDER REDESIGNING IT
INCORPORATING BETTER DRAINAGE
DESIGN AS WELL AND PLACING THE
SIDEWALK ON TOP OF A DRAINAGE
CLOSER TO THE ROAD PERHAPS WITH
BARRIERS OR BOLLARDS TO PROTECT
THE PEDESTRIANS.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH AND I HOPE
YOU ALSO FORWARD THE SPEEDING
CONCERNS TO APD.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU
.
>> OK, IT LOOKS LIKE WE HAVE
ANOTHER PERSON WITH OUR HAND
RAISED NINE SEVEN FIVE IS THE
LAST THREE DIGITS OF THEIR
PHONE NUMBER SO I'M GOING TO
ALLOW YOU TO TALK AGAIN.
YOU WILL HAVE THREE MINUTES AND
I WILL GIVE YOU 30 SECONDS
BEFORE YOUR TIME IS
WE GO IS
TEN BARGELD THIS TIME ARE THE
MAIN INGREDIENTS PROJECT
OVERALL I BELIEVE IT DO ANYWAY
JUST JUST A MOMENT IF YOU COULD
FIRST OF ALL THE AUDIO IS
REALLY CHOPPY.
>> IS THIS IS THIS FINBAR
AGAIN?
IF SO YES.
WE ONLY ONLY ALLOW ONE
OPPORTUNITY FOR EACH PERSON TO
SPEAK.
>> OH SORRY I JUST WROTE RULES
OF THE COMMISSION.
SORRY AS ALWAYS FEEL FREE TO
WRITE AN EMAIL OR CALL IN AT
THE NEXT MEETING PLEASE.
>> OH YEAH FOR SURE.
ALL RIGHT.
I JUST CALLED ON TWO DEVICES
AND I WASN'T SURE WHICH ONE
THEM GET PICKED FIRST.
UNDERSTOOD.
YOU KNOW I FEEL LIKE THE CARD
DID NOT USE ALL OF HIS THREE
MINUTES WAS NOT SO HE STILL HAD
ABOUT A MINUTE AND A HALF IF
YOU LIKE THEN YEAH.
>> I THINK GIVEN THAT FEEL FREE
TO GO AHEAD WE'LL CONTINUE ON
RUNNING.
>> GO FOR IT.
THANKS GUYS.
I APPRECIATE THAT.
SO YEAH JUST TALKING ABOUT THE
MILITARY PROJECT I MEAN
GENERALLY I'M SUPPORTIVE OF IT
.
I REALLY REALLY LIKE THE
REDUCTION OF THE TABLES IF WE
COULD DO SOMETHING LIKE THAT
NEXT YEAR I THINK THAT WOULD BE
EXCELLENT.
I JUST VOICED MY CONCERNS TO
THEM ANYTHING TO SLOW DOWN THE
PEOPLE GOING ON TO NEXT YEAR
FLYING FIFTY SIXTY MILES AN
HOUR AND THEN ALSO PEOPLE THAT
ARE COMING INTO TOWN ALSO
FLYING FIFTY MILES SO SPEED
BUMPS TRAFFIC CALLING NOW SO
MUCH BETTER THAT SIDEWALK AND
ALSO JUST INCREASE THE SAFETY
OF THE CAR.
>> WELL AND I WOULDN'T
PROTECTED BIKE LANES ON DIRT
ROAD EITHER AND ONE KNOW LIKE
BY BYPRODUCT OF EMILIAN PROJECT
THAT IS THAT PEOPLE WILL BE
DISCOURAGED.
SO I THINK THAT YOU'RE GOING TO
SEE THAT.
>> YES.
THANK YOU.
THAT'S THAT'S PRETTY MUCH ALL I
HAVE TO SAY TO THANK YOU GUYS
SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
THERE ANYONE ELSE WITH HANDLER
IS DOES NOT APPEAR TO BE SO OK
SO THAT'S THAT'S EVERYBODY
RIGHT.
THANK YOU TO ALL THE MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC FOR ATTENDING
THIS EVENING AND PLEASE
COMMISSIONERS TAKE NOTE OF THE
EMAILS THAT ARE IN OUR PACKET
FOR THIS MONTH.
THERE'S ABOUT A HALF DOZEN OR
SO IN THERE SO PLEASE TAKE A
LOOK AT THOSE IF YOU HAVEN'T
ALREADY.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT MOVING ON TO BUSINESS
FIRST UP OF THE TWO ITEMS WE
HAVE TONIGHT IS THE BROCKMANN
PARKING REMOVAL RESOLUTION.
THAT'S A PROPOSED RESOLUTION
AND I BELIEVE CYRUS WILL WALK
US THROUGH THE PROPOSED
RESOLUTION AND PROJECT AND WE
WILL BE VOTING ON WHETHER TO
SIGN UP TO COUNCIL.
I BELIEVE THAT AFTER CYRUS
WALKS US THROUGH SO OR IS THERE
CYRUS THANK YOU.
YOU CAN HEAR ME OK, I'LL
BRIEFLY SUMMARIZE THE PROJECT.
I THINK WE ORIGINALLY BUDGETED
TIME TO GO INTO MORE DETAIL.
I KNOW A FEW OF YOU HAVE BEEN
TO MEETINGS REGARDING THE
PROJECT AND MOST OF IT IS
RELATIVELY STRAIGHTFORWARD AND
WE'RE FOCUSING REALLY ON THE
ACTION THE BUSINESS ACTION IN
FRONT OF YOU.
BUT TO SUMMARIZE THE PROJECT,
THE PROJECT INVOLVES FILLING
SIDEWALK GAPS ON CROSLAND AND
BROCKMANN WHICH ARE AND
BOULEVARD AND CROSS AND DRIVE
TO STREETS THAT ARE SOUTH
OF STADIUM VADE PACARD S THE
PACKARD AND STADIUM.
THE INTERSECTION CROSLAND IS
RELATIVELY STRAIGHTFORWARD IN
TERMS THE TECHNICAL CHALLENGES
BROCKMANN DID INVOLVE A LITTLE
BIT MORE ITERATION IN THE
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT AND THE SORT
OF TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY TO
ESPECIALLY TO REDUCE IMPACT TO
TREES AND THINGS OF THAT NATURE
.
THE ACTION ITEM IN FRONT
OF COMMISSION TODAY IS RELATED
TO A REMOVAL OF PARKING ALONG
BROCKMANN TO FACILITATE THE
CONSTRUCTION OF THE SIDEWALK.
SO AS SOME FIRST MANY OF YOU
WERE AWARE A REMOVAL PARKING
FOR MORE THAN ONE BLOCK
REQUIRED CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL.
SO AS THE ADVISORY COMMISSION
ON THESE MATTERS TO COUNCIL
WE'RE BRINGING THIS MATTER
BEFORE THE COMMISSION TO
CONTINUE TO WEIGH IN ON THAT
ACTION AND IT SHOULD IN YOUR
PACKET BUT I WILL SHARE AS WELL
HAVE THE RESOLUTION UP
SO THE
RESOLUTION HAS A TITLE
MEMORANDUM SUMMARIZING I THINK
IN PARTICULAR MAYBE OF NOTE IS
FOLLOWING SEVERAL PUBLIC
MEETINGS ON BROCKMANN AFTER ALL
THE DESIGN NIROS BROCKMAN'S AND
THIRTY ONE FEET TRYING TO FIT
IN WITH IN ORDER TO CREATE
ADDITIONAL SPACE FOR YOUR
SIDEWALK PROPOSED DESIGN WILL
PROXIMITY TO THE SIDEWALK
ADJACENT RESIDENCES AND WE'LL
ALSO HAVE THE EFFECT OF SELLING
TRAFFIC BY NARROWING THE
ROADWAY IN ORDER TO ACCOMMODATE
THIS THE PARKING WILL NEED TO
BE LIMITED ON THE SOUTH SIDE
OF BRACKNEY BOULEVARD AND THE
PROPOSED PAVEMENT LAYOUT ON
BOULEVARD WILL ALLOW TO YIELD
TO TRAFFIC WHILE ALLOWING
PARKING ON THE NORTH SIDE ONLY
AFTER ONE TWENTY SIX CITY
CODE REQUIRE CITY COUNCIL
APPROVAL FOR THE PERMANENT OR
TEMPORARY RESTRICTION
OF PERMANENT MORE THAN ONE
BLOCK THE PARTICULAR WHEREAS
CLAUSE AGAIN AS BEFORE YOU HAS
BEEN HIGHLIGHTED TRAFFIC I CAN
RECOMMEND THE CITY COUNCIL
APPROVES THE PROHIBITION
OF PARKING ON THE BOULEVARD
FROM BROCKPORT THIRD ON ROAD.
THAT IS NOT THE FULL EXTENT
OF THE FIVE HOUR GAP IN THE WAY
THE VERY FIRST WAREHOUSE CLAUSE
TO WALK OUT FROM PACARD
DEFERRED ROAD.
SO THIS IS ITS IT IS A SIZABLE
SEGMENT I BELIEVE IT'S THE
MAJORITY OF IT BUT IT'S NOT
FOUR FOR ONLY THE SECTION FROM
THE PARKING PROHIBIT IT ALONG
THE SOUTH SIDE.
SO THAT IS THE ASSUMPTION
THAT
IS THE ACTION BEFORE COMMISSION
TONIGHT IS WHETHER
TRANSPORTATION WHEREAS CLAUSES
BUILT IN HAS BEEN WORDED AS IT
WILL PROCEED TO COUNCIL
OF TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS THIS APPROACH
APPROVING THE PROHIBITION ON
FREE PARKING OUTSIDE AGAIN
THAT'S THE ACTION FOR
COMMISSION TODAY.
>> ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS
ARISING IS THERE ARE NO
QUESTIONS AND WE'RE POST A LOT
OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT AND A LOT
OF WORK BY THE ENGINEERING TEAM
FOR THIS DESIGN TO SEE A
QUESTION.
>> I THINK YOU'RE STILL MUTED
APOLOGIES.
>> THIS IS MY FIRST SESSION AS
A COMMISSIONER ON THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION SO I
DON'T QUITE HAVE THE SAME
CONTEXT AS PERHAPS OTHERS.
WHAT I DON'T SEE REFLECTED IN
THIS MEMORANDUM IS THE
REASONINGS FOR THIS BAN THAT
EMERGED FROM THE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT.
TO ME THAT SEEMS LIKE IMPORTANT
CONTEXT OF WHAT SPECIFIC TOPICS
CAME UP IN THE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT THAT SURFACE THAT
THIS DESIGN WAS THE BEST
SOLUTION FORWARD FOR.
I CAN TOUCH ON THAT AND ALL
OF THIS ALL FAIR.
I CAN APPRECIATE THE FIRST TIME
THE COMMISSION BERTHELOT WE
WERE KIND OF CUTTING TO THE
ACRONYM FOR COMMISSION BUT I
CAN APPRECIATE WANTING EXTRA
CONTEXT THE THE MAIN DESIGN THE
MAIN ITEMS OF DISCUSSION THAT
IMPACTED THE PROPOSED DESIGN
RELATED TO OUR THE TWO BIGGEST
TOPICS OF DISCUSSION WERE ON
MINIMIZING IMPACT TO EXISTING
TREES IN THE RIGHT WAY.
SO I BELIEVE THE THE PROPOSED
DESIGN CERTAINLY AND IT IMPACTS
SINGLE DIGIT NUMBER OF TREES
OF ACROSS BOTH SIDEWALK GAPS.
I WANT TO SAY SOMETHING ON THE
ORDER TWO TREES PER PROJECT.
THANK YOU.
TREES ON BROCKMANN AND EITHER
ONE OR TWO TREES ON CROSLAND.
I THOUGHT I DON'T KNOW SOME
OF THOSE NUMBERS OFF TOPIC BUT
NOT TO HAVE A GOOD PROJECT
MANAGER FOR IT.
I WAS JUST THE TRANSPORTATION
ENGINEER KIND OF HELPING WITH
THE TRANSPORTATION RELATED
ELEMENTS OF THE PROJECT.
SO THAT WAS ONE MAIN DISCUSSION
ITEM AND THE OTHER WAS
CURRENTLY THERE IS PARKING
ALLOWED ON BOTH SIDES OF THE
STREETS.
THERE WAS CONSIDERABLE
HESITATION AMONG THE RESIDENCES
TO ELIMINATE BOTH SIDES
OF PARKING.
YOU KNOW, PARKING IS ALWAYS
SOMETHING THAT WE TRIED.
THERE IS A THERE ARE TRADEOFFS
ASSOCIATED WITH PROVIDING
PARKING ESPECIALLY IN AN AREA
LIKE THIS THAT TENDS TO HAVE
PLENTY OF OPTIONS FOR SOME SOME
OFF PARKING AT VARIOUS
RESIDENCE TO RESIDENTS.
BUT THERE IS A NUMBER FOR
PRIVATE RESIDENCES THAT EACH
HAVE THEIR OWN DRIVEWAY WITH
SOME AMOUNT OF FREE PARKING
PROVIDED.
SO IT'S NOT INHERENTLY ABOUT
THE PARKING SUPPLY FOR THE
RESIDENCES ALTHOUGH OF COURSE
THEY WILL HAVE SOME OCCASIONAL
NEED FOR MORE PARKING THERE.
THEIR PROPERTY ALLOWS FROM A
TRANSPORTATION PROFESSIONAL
PERSPECTIVE, ONE OF THE
BENEFITS OF PROVIDING AN
ADDITIONAL SIDE OF PARKING IS
THAT IT FURTHER CREATES FURTHER
FRICTION IN THE ROAD AS I'M
SURE MANY OF YOU ARE AWARE AND
I'VE HEARD US SAY IN DIFFERENT
CONTEXTS THERE'S A WIDER STREET
THE MORE THE MORE OF THE HUMAN
MIND SORT OF TAKES TO SEEING IT
AS A FREE FOR ALL.
JUST BE MORE NICK.
I KNOW I KNOW THE WAY HE IS AT
PRETTY MUCH EVERY PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT WITH ME SO PLEASE
HELP THE FILL IN THE GAP THAT
I'M I'M NOT HAVING TO STEP OUT
A LITTLE MORE CONTEXT TO THE
DECISION MAKING PROCESS THERE.
WE KIND OF HAD TWO OPTIONS IN
TERMS OF BUILDING THE SIDEWALK
WE COULD BUILD IT SO THERE'S A
ROW OF TREES OUT THERE IN ABOUT
THE PLACE YOU WOULD EXPECT THE
SIDEWALK TO BE.
BUT THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY IS
EXTRA WIDE.
SO WE HAD THE ONE OPTION THAT
WE HAD WAS TO BUILD A SIDEWALK
ON THE I GUESS IF YOU CAN
ENVISION THE HOUSE SIDE OF THE
TREES SO WITH THE TREES BETWEEN
THE SIDEWALK AND THE ROAD AND
THERE IS THERE'S ENOUGH PUBLIC
RIGHT WAY TO DO THAT.
BUT THE DOWNSIDE OF THAT IS
THAT AT LEAST ON ONE SIDE
OF THE STREET IT GETS THE
SIDEWALK PRETTY CLOSE TO WHERE
THE HOUSES ARE THERE AND THAT
WAS A CONCERN AMONG THE
RESIDENTS.
THE OTHER OPTION THAT WE HAD
WAS TO MOVE THE CURB LINE
OF THE ROAD FUNCTIONALLY
NARROWING THE STREET AND BY
DOING THAT WE CREATED SPACE IN
WHICH WE COULD BUILD THE
SIDEWALK AND THAT IS THE OPTION
THAT WE ALL ULTIMATELY SETTLED
ON THROUGH THE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT PROCESS AND THAT
DOING THAT, AS I SAID, NARROWS
THE STREET BECAUSE WE'RE
NARROWING THE STREET.
WE CAN'T ANY LONGER HAVE
PARKING ON BOTH SIDES OF STREET
SO THUS WE ARE HERE FOR THE
RESOLUTION TO REMOVE PARKING ON
ONE SIDE SO THAT YOU KNOW, TO
MAINTAIN ENOUGH SPACE ON THE
RIGHT SIDE IF THAT HELPS, IT
DOES.
THANK YOU TO BOTH OF YOU FOR
HELPING TO CLARIFY THAT
AIRPORT.
THANK YOU FOR THE QUESTION AND
THANK YOU, NICK.
I APPRECIATE THE THE ADDITIONAL
CONTEXT.
ARE THERE ANY OTHER QUESTIONS
OR ANY OTHER I GUESS ITEMS FOR
DISCUSSION BEFORE VOTES ON THIS
ON THIS ITEM OR ITS THING?
>> NONE.
IS THERE A MOTION TO VOTE ON
THE RESOLUTION TO PROHIBIT ON
STREET PARKING ON THE SOUTH
SIDE OF BROOKLYN BOULEVARD FROM
COURT TO FREEDOM ROAD WE HAVE,
HE SAID A THANK YOU AND GOOD
MORNING SECOND, I GUESS I'M NOT
SAYING EVERYBODY I'M SORRY I
SECOND IT.
ALL RIGHT.
THERE YOU GO.
THANK YOU.
IT'S LIKE AN AVERAGE JOE I
ACTUALLY COULD WE CYRUS MAYBE
STOP SHARING SO WE COULD SEE
THE BOATS GO.
>> THANK YOU VERY ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR HIGH RESOLUTION TO
PROHIBIT STREET PARKING ON THE
SOUTH SIDE OF BROOKLYN
BOULEVARD FROM BROCKPORT TO
FOUR DOWN THE PLEASE SAY YES OR
RAISE YOUR HAND.
>> YES, ALL THOSE OPPOSED
PLEASE SAY NO OR RAISE YOUR
HAND.
THE RESOLUTION IS APPROVED THAT
WILL GO TO CITY COUNCIL.
SO THANK YOU EVERYBODY FOR
THAT.
THANK YOU AGAIN TO CYNTHIA AND
NICK.
OK, I JUST WANTED TO GIVE KUDOS
TO THE STAFF FOR THAT.
THAT SEEMED LIKE A REALLY
POWERFUL USE OF PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT AND IT SEEMS LIKE
I'M JUST IMPRESSED WHEN THERE'S
A WILLINGNESS TO KIND OF STEP
BACK FROM THE INITIAL DESIGN
AND CONSIDER PEOPLE'S
VIEWPOINTS AND IT SEEMS LIKE
YOU'VE ENDED UP TO PLACE THAT
IN MY MIND IS LIKE THE BEST
OF ALL WORLDS OR WORLD
SIDEWALKS.
THE TREE STAYS SO JUST I JUST
WANTED TO COMMEND YOU ALL FOR
THAT.
I'M SURE IT WAS A LOT OF OF
WORK TO GET TO WHERE YOU GOT
YEAH.
GREAT KUDOS.
>> ALL RIGHT.
ONCE AGAIN I'LL PASS THAT ALONG
TO THE OTHER PRODUCTS THAT
RIGHT HERE TONIGHT.
>> THANK YOU.
LIKE A BUSINESS ITEM TONIGHT AN
UPDATE TO THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION ORDINANCE THAT THIS
IS AN UPDATE TO OUR BYLAWS.
I BELIEVE IT'S ARIANNA IS A YOU
WHO IS GOING TO INTRODUCE THIS
OR OR MELISSA OR SOMEBODY THAT
CAME FROM CYNTHIA IS GOING TO
BE PRESENTING THIS.
>> I KNOW MELISSA IS ALSO
FAMILIAR.
OK, YEAH.
THIS IS RECENTLY ADDED TO OUR
AGENDA IN THE LAST FEW DAYS SO
I DON'T REALLY HAVE A LOT
BACKGROUND ON IT.
SO I YOU GUYS HAVE IT UP THAT
IS AVAILABLE TO SHARE THE THE
THE ADDITIONS TO OUR BYLAWS
CERTAINLY.
>> GIVE ME A MOMENT.
>> OK, I ACTUALLY IT'S ONE
THING I DO NOT HAVE OPEN FOR
CLARIFICATION IT IS AN UPDATE
TO THE ORDINANCE NOT THE
BYLAWS.
SNOOKE
AND IN ALL HONESTY
COUNCIL MEMBER ECKMANN MAY WISH
TO SPEAK ON THIS TOPIC AS WELL
BECAUSE I THINK YOU HAVE SOME
FAMILIARITY WITH THAT.
>> I CAN READ THROUGH THE
ADDITION THAT WAS MADE THAT
WOULD HELP JUST WHILE PEOPLE
ARE MAYBE GETTING ORGANIZED.
SO THERE IS SECTION THREE
OF THE DEFINITION OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION OR IT
STATES THAT THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION SHALL HAVE THE
FOLLOWING DUE TO POWERS AND
DUTIES AND AMONG THOSE NUMBERS
SIX HAD READ I BELIEVE I HAVE
READ SAFETY RELATED PROGRAMS
AND PROJECTS AND THE PROPOSAL
IS TO ADD TO THAT SENTENCE
INCLUDING CONSIDERATION
OF VEHICLE AND PEDESTRIAN CRASH
INFORMATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR CRASH PREVENTION PROVIDED
BY CITY STAFF
.
I CAN CLARIFY THAT THAT IS THE
RIGHT THING THAT IS ADDED BUT
SHOWN IN THE HIGHLIGHTED
SECTION THAT I THINK IS THE
ONLY PART OF THIS RESOLUTION
CHANGING THE VERY YES SOMEBODY
MAY BE FOCUSING ON WHERE THIS
CAME FROM.
SO I WASN'T SURE IF YOU WERE
GOING TO INTRODUCE THAT BECAUSE
MY I CAN FILL IN A LITTLE BIT
OF MY MOTIVATION SO I WORKED
WITH THE CITY ATTORNEY'S
OFFICE.
>> I WAS EXPLORING AND WAYS TO
INCORPORATE OUR OVERSIGHT
OF KRESH INCIDENCES AND I KNOW
THAT THAT'S SOMETHING THAT THE
COMMISSION HAS BEEN WORKING ON
SINCE LAST YEAR BEFORE I
SWITCHED BACK WITH ERICA AND I
LOOKED AT SOME OTHER MODELS AND
OTHER CITIES, THOSE CITIES HAD
A MUCH HIGHER NUMBER OF SERIOUS
CRASHES AND HAD THEIR OWN
CITIZEN COMMITTEE THAT WAS
DEVOTED JUST TO CRASH REVIEW
AFTER TALKING WITH THE CITY
ATTORNEY'S OFFICE AND SOMETHING
I FEEL LIKE THIS IS WHERE STAFF
WOULD HELP.
I BELIEVE THAT HE WORKED WITH
TRANSPORTATION STAFF TO
BASICALLY INCORPORATE SOMETHING
THAT WAS WORKABLE WITHIN OUR
CURRENT COMMISSION AND THAT WAS
CONSISTENT WITH WORK THAT WAS
ALREADY PLANNED IN TERMS OF OUR
GROUP'S CRASH VIEW.
SO THIS AGAIN JUST CHANGES THE
ORDINANCE IN TERMS OF WHAT IT
SAYS THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION IS RESPONSIBLE FOR
AND THEN WHEN WE HAVE OUR
ANNUAL UPDATE TO OUR BYLAWS, WE
WOULD WANT TO INCORPORATE THIS
INPUT ON THAT.
SO THAT'S IN A NUTSHELL.
>> YEAH.
AND I THINK WHAT I WOULD ADD TO
THAT IS THAT IT'S CONSISTENT
WITH THE CRASH REVIEW TEAM THAT
WE HAVE HAD IN PLACE THAT HAS
BEEN WORKING FOR ABOUT A YEAR
NOW AND WITH THAT REVISED
REPORTING THAT WE'VE BEEN DOING
WITH THE COMMISSION SO AS
COUNCIL MEMBER AND SAID IT'S
PRETTY CONSISTENT WITH WORK
THAT WAS ONGOING AND PLANNED OR
SO THIS IS I AGREE IT'S ALIGNED
WITH WHAT WE'VE BEEN DOING MORE
OF OVER THE LAST YEAR WHICH HAS
BEEN I THINK A WELCOME ADDITION
TO OUR OUR DUTIES HERE.
SO I AM HAPPY TO SEE THIS
REFLECTED IN THIS DOCUMENT AND
THEN WE'LL ADD IT TO THE BYLAWS
THE NEXT TIME THAT COMES UP
NEXT YEAR FOR CONSIDERATION TO
MODIFY WHEREVER IT'S
APPROPRIATE WITHIN THE BYLAWS.
SO WHAT WE'LL BE VOTING ON NOT
RIGHT NOW BUT WE'RE HOPEFUL WE
WILL BE VOTING ON THIS EVENING
IS SO WHAT EXACTLY IS THIS
DOCUMENTS NOT OUR BYLAWS.
IT'S LIKE THE GUIDING DOCUMENT
OF THE COMMISSION PETITCODIAC
IT'S WITHIN OUR CITY LAWS THAT
SETS UP DIFFERENT COMMISSIONS
SO FINDS WHAT THE COMMISSION OK
THAT SOUNDS GOOD QUESTION.
>> I JUST WANTED TO SAY THANK
YOU FOR YOUR EXTRA EFFORT THIS
PAST YEAR LOOKING AT CRASHES
AND THE CRASH REVIEW PROCESS
AND AND FOR THIS CHANGE I THINK
IT'S A GOOD CHANGE TO MAKE.
>> THANK YOU.
I AGREE WITH YOU.
OK, NICK.
I SO I'LL THROW SOMETHING OUT
FOR I DIDN'T KNOW THIS WAS
COMING FORWARD BUT OTHERWISE IT
WOULD NOT BE FOR NOW BUT JUST
TO BRING THIS UP FOR
CONSIDERATION SINCE WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT AMENDING THIS
ANYWAY PART TO BE TALKS ABOUT
STAFF ON THE COMMISSION AND IT
LISTS THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR HAS NOT
COME TO THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION YEARS THAT THAT IS
ACTUALLY DELEGATED DOWN TO
LEVELS TO ME, WHICH IS WHY I'M
I'VE ALWAYS BEEN COMING TO THE
KNOW INFREQUENTLY I GUESS
RECENTLY TO THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION THROWING IT OUT FOR
THE CONSIDERATION WHETHER YOU
WANT TO TAKE THAT OUT OR NOT
SINCE THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR IS
DOESN'T REALLY COME TO THESE
MEETINGS BUT IT DOESN'T MATTER
TO ME JUST THROWING IT OUT
THERE IF WE'RE DOING CLEANUP
ANYWAY.
>> I MEAN JUST LIKE YOU SAID
SAYS THAT THE ADMINISTRATOR
SHALL DESIGNATE DELEGATE I
GUESS DESIGNATE SUPPORT STAFF
LIKE THE TRANSPORTATION STAFF
AND AND ARIANNA FOR EXAMPLE.
BUT AND HE AND HE HAS DELEGATED
AND I GUESS HE CAN DELEGATE BUT
I JUST THOUGHT I WOULD MENTION
IT SINCE THAT'S NOT ACTUALLY
BEEN A REALLY FUNCTIONAL PART
OF WHO'S PARTICIPATING AND THAT
INCLUDES THE CHIEF OF POLICE
AND THERE'S NO MENTION OF THE
CHIEF OF POLICE DELEGATING TO
OTHER STAFF
.
WELL, I DON'T LIKE THE WORD
SMITH ON THE FLIER.
I THINK I THINK THAT'S VALID
AND WE MAYBE WILL BRING IT BACK
IN NEXT MONTH.
I THINK LET'S THIS MONTH
CONFINE IT TO THE THE SECTION
IN QUESTION AND THEN MAYBE WE
SHOULD WE SHOULD LOOK THROUGH
THE REST OF THIS AND IDENTIFY
IF THERE ARE ANY OTHER CHANGES
OR MAYBE ALL OF THOSE INCLUDING
THIS ATTENDANCE ONE NEXT MONTH
BECAUSE THAT'S SOMETHING ELSE
THAT OUGHT TO GET IN THE
BYLAWS.
I THINK WE'VE UPDATED THE
ATTENDANCE LIST OR THE BYLAWS
ONCE BEFORE ONCE OR TWICE
BEFORE.
SO WE'LL DO THAT AS WELL.
THANKS FOR THANKS FOR NOTICING
THAT THEY CAN BRING IT UP.
I I DON'T DISAGREE THAT THAT
SHOULD BE UPDATED AS WELL.
BUT FOR TODAY LET'S STICK WITH
THE AGENDA AND IT'S AN UPDATE
TO SECTION THREE A SIX.
SO ARE THERE ANY OTHER
QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS AT SEEING
NONE IS THERE A MOTION TO VOTE
ON THE UPDATE THAT WE TALKED
ABOUT TO SECTION THREE?
EIGHTY SIX OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
DEFINITION MOVED BY ERIC
SECONDED BY ONE TO ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR OF THE RECOMMENDED
CHANGE.
>> RAISE YOUR HAND OR SAY YES,
ALL THOSE OPPOSED.
>> YES, SIR.
AND OR SAY NO.
THE CHANGE IS APPROVED.
THANK YOU EVERYBODY FOR THOSE
TWO BUSINESS ITEMS.
ALL RIGHT.
AND ARIANNA, WANT TO MAKE A
NOTE TO AT LEAST BRING BACK
THAT THE MEMBERSHIP PART
OF THIS SOME FUTURE IT'S NOT
URGENT BUT YOU KNOW, THE NEXT
COUPLE MONTHS NEXT IS THE
INFORMATION DISCUSSION SECTION
OF THE AGENDA.
FIRST OF ALL, WE HAVE TWO ITEMS
TO MAKE.
FIRST UP IS THE UPDATE ON THE
STREET LIGHT PROJECT SIRIUS THE
FLOOR IS YOURS FOR THAT ONE.
THANK YOU AGAIN I I DON'T HAVE
MATERIALS TO PRESENT AS SUCH.
I'LL SHARE MY SCREEN AGAIN JUST
BECAUSE I DO HAVE THE PROJECT
ONE PAGE AND THAT MIGHT BE A
USEFUL RESOURCE TO TALK THROUGH
.
SO I'M GOING TO
OK SO THIS IS
AN UPDATE ON THE LADY THREE
LIGHT CONVERSION PROJECT SO AS
LONG THIS PAGE IT'S A GRANT
FUNDED PROJECT THAT ALLOWS THE
CITY TO TRANSITION TO
STREETLIGHTS FROM LESS
EFFICIENT HYPERCONNECTIVITY
LIGHTS TO MORE EFFICIENT
LIGHTS.
SO FIRST SOME CONTEXT.
FIRST OF ALL, JUST TAKING A
STEP BACK TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
STREETLIGHTS ARE AN ASPECT OUR
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK WE WE
TYPICALLY I'D SAY THE FOCUS
OF OUR TEAM WORK IS TYPICALLY
BEEN WHERE STREETLIGHTS AFFECT
TRAVEL PATTERNS, ESPECIALLY
STREETLIGHTS AT UNCONTROL BLOCK
CROSSWALKS.
THAT BEING SAID, THERE IS A
MUCH LARGER UNIVERSE
OF STREETLIGHTS OUTSIDE OF THAT
SUBSET THAT WE ALSO HAVE A ROLE
IN AND THERE IS BROADLY
SPEAKING A NUMBER OF STREET
LIGHTS WITHIN THE CITY AND
THERE ARE THE MAJORITY OF THOSE
STREETLIGHTS ON THE ORDER
OF LIKE FIVE THOUSAND PLUS ARE
OWNED AND MAINTAINED BY OUR
LOCAL UTILITY.
THE CITY ON STREET LIGHTS IS A
SMALLER NUMBER AND THREE
THOUSAND RANGE.
I DON'T REMEMBER THE EXACT
NUMBER OF TIME I HAD AND THOSE
ARE BY AND LARGE THERE'S A VERY
SMALL NUMBER THAT AREN'T THAT
WE ARE WORKING TO CONVERT BY
COMPARISON DTD FIVE THOUSAND
PLUS LIGHTS ARE LARGELY NOT DUE
SO THIS HAS BEEN POTENTIAL
PROJECT ITEM FOR A WHILE THE
RETURN ON INVESTMENT EVEN
WITHOUT GRANT FUNDING WAS WAS
IMPRESSIVE ON THE ORDER OF JUST
A FEW YEARS WITH GRANT FUNDING
THAT BRINGS IT DOWN TO WITHIN I
THINK WITHIN A YEAR OR TWO
FRANKLY WHAT THE RETURN ON
INVESTMENT JUST FOR THE ENERGY
SAVINGS ALONE IS IS QUITE SO.
IT'S SO THE INTENT OF THE
PROJECT IS TO CONVERT THOSE
REMAINING FOUR THOUSAND PLUS
LIGHTS TO ORANGE LED TO TWO
ELADIO FOR SOME FURTHER CONTEXT
AS RELATED TO ACCEPTING THE
GRANT AND OUR PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
UP TILL NOW A BIG A BIG POINT
DISCUSSION THAT STAFF KNEW
GOING INTO THIS WAS RELATED TO
THE THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN LED
LIGHTS VERSUS YOU KNOW,
TRADITIONAL HIGH PRESSURE
SODIUM LIGHT IS A WARMER COLOR
TEMPERATURE
WHICH IS KIND
OF MORE LIKE ORANGE YELLOW LEDS
CAN BE VARIOUS COOLER
TEMPERATURES BUT DTT STANDARD
IS A COLOR KIND OF WHITE COLOR
TEMPERATURE.
THERE ARE SOME VISIBILITY
IMPACTS RELATED TO THAT BUT
IT'S RELATIVELY MINIMAL
COMPARED TO THE WATTAGE AND
WHAT WE'VE DONE AFTER A FAIR
AMOUNT OF DISCUSSION DC AND
SOME PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT ALONG
THESE LINES WE WE WERE ABLE TO
SETTLE ON A SORT
OF MULTIPRONGED SOLUTION HERE
INSTEAD OF ALL FOUR THOUSAND
OF THOSE LIGHTS BEING
INSTALLED.
THE STANDARD AT COULEUR FOUR
THOUSAND K COLOR TEMPERATURE
ENOUGH COOLER IS A HIGHER
NUMBER OF THE WARMER COLOR
TEMPERATURE OF TWENTY SEVEN
HUNDRED IS GOING TO BE
INSTALLED ACROSS ALL CONVERTED
LIGHTS.
WHAT DOES DIFFER A LITTLE BIT
IS THE WATTAGE.
I'LL THROW THAT ON HERE BRIEFLY
TO INDICATE THE FACTS HERE.
THE MAJORITY OF THE LIGHTS THAT
WILL BE CONVERTED ARE ARE ARE
GOING TO BE AT THE LOWER 48
WATER TEMPERATURE.
THOSE ARE MOSTLY ON OUR LOCAL
STREETS ON ANY TYPE OF ARTERIAL
COLLECTOR MAJOR ROADS.
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE THE
SLIGHTLY HIGHER WATER
TEMPERATURE AGAIN FOR
VISIBILITY AND THERE'S SOME
OTHER CRITERIA RELATED TO ITS
ADJACENCY TO A SCHOOL ZONE
DENHA MINOR STREETS AND ALLEYS
WEST WASHINGTON STREET BIKE
BOULEVARD IS A POTENTIAL
CAPITAL PROJECT THAT WE'VE BEEN
IN IN DISCUSSIONS FOR A WHILE.
SO WE WANT TO ENSURE THAT THAT
HAS ADEQUATE LIGHTING AS WELL.
LET'S SEE WHAT ELSE IS AT A
HIGH LEVEL.
OH, AND IN THIS DATA I BELIEVE
SOMEWHERE ON HERE FROM PREVIOUS
PROBABLY MATERIALS BUT AGAIN
GOING BACK TO THAT UNCONTROLLED
AND MID BLOCK CROSSING THIS
ACTUALLY INDICATES UNCONTROLLED
CROSSINGS BUT THAT'S GOING TO
BE ON SMALLER ROADS.
WE ARE STILL INTENDING TO ON
OUR MAJOR ROADS INSTALLED
STANDARD WHICH IS THAT FOUR
THOUSAND K GENERALLY FIFTY
LIGHT.
I THINK SOME OF THE EXISTING
ONES ARE A LITTLE BIT HIGHER
WATTAGE BUT THAT'S THE
BOTSWANANS THAT WOULD BE
INSTALLED MOST OF THESE
CONVERSIONS ARE NOT TOUCHING A
MAJOR BLOCK CROFTING IT'S A
VERY IT'S A RELATIVELY SMALL
NUMBER OF THIS IS FOUR THOUSAND
PLUS BUT JUST AS A NOTE THERE
IS TECHNICALLY A THIRD CATEGORY
BEYOND THESE TWO BUT IT'S QUITE
SMALL.
SO IF THEY DO THE PROJECT WEB
PAGE IT'S DISCUSSING THE
DETAILS.
THE PROJECT IS FROM A
SUSTAINABILITY AND EFFICIENCY
PERSPECTIVE.
THE LOWER ELECTRIC ELECTRICITY
FOOTPRINT OF LED LIGHTING IS
SPECIFICALLY CALLED FOR IN OUR
EIGHT TO ZERO CLIMATE ACTION
PLAN.
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT WAS REALLY
ABOUT THE VARIOUS WATTAGES WE
ORIGINALLY DID PILOT A LOWER
WATTAGE LIGHT OF TWENTY NINE
MONTHS THE POSSIBILITY AS WELL
IN DISCUSSIONS WITH DC
AFTERWARDS AND REALIZING SORT
OF THE MATERIAL DIFFERENCES THE
REASON WE SAID ALONG THE FIFTY
EIGHT AND FORTY EIGHT LOT AS
OUR HIGH AND LOW IS BECAUSE
THERE ARE THE SAME LIGHTS IT'S
A SIMPLE I'M NOT SURE WHAT THE
EQUIPMENT IS CALLED BUT THERE
IS A THERE IS THE ABILITY TO
ADJUST THAT PARTICULAR LIGHT
FIXTURE FROM FORTY TO FIFTY.
IT WAS SO THEY'RE INSTALLING
THAT AS THERE'S ALL IN THE SAME
LIGHT WHICH MAKES THE
MAINTENANCE NEEDS HER SPECIAL
ORDER ITEM LIKE THIS A LITTLE
BIT SIMPLER SO WE CAN PUT
RESULTS KIND OF REFLECT THAT IT
WAS RELATIVELY A VERY SMALL
AMOUNT PUBLIC INPUT RECEIVED
FIFTY SIX SURVEY RESPONSES AND
THEN THIS THIS WEBPAGE SHOWS
ALL THE LIGHTS THAT ARE IN THAT
PRODUCT SO THE BLUE LIGHTS ARE
FIFTY EIGHT WHAT ORANGE OR
FORTY EIGHT WATT AND THEN WE
ALSO ACTUALLY HAVE SOME LIGHTS
IN SORT OF ANOTHER SMALL SUBSET
BUT FIFTY FOUR AND FORTY FOUR
WHAT'S YOUR KIND OF LIKE IN
SOME OF OUR RESIDENTIAL AREAS
THERE'S LIKE SCHAUDER
PEDESTRIAN SCALE POSTOP LIGHTS
THESE ARE MOSTLY ON THE NORTH
SIDE OF TOWN I THINK WE LIKE
THESE GREEN ONES.
HERE ARE THE FORTY FOUR WATTS
AND THEN THE BLUE ONES ARE THE
FIFTY FOUR ON AND THEN IF YOU
CLICK ON ANY INDIVIDUAL ONE
IT'LL TELL YOU THE DETAILS
OF WHAT IS THAT IDEA WHAT WHAT
IT'S GOING TO BE CONVERTED TO
AND SO ON.
SO WHAT PAGE KIND OF GOES INTO
ALL OUT CONTEXT FOR THE PROJECT
REASON PROGRESS SO UP TO NOW
THE CONVERSION ITSELF ACTUALLY
BEGAN THE SUMMER IN JULY AND IT
HAS HAD ONE OR TWO REPORTS FROM
D CONTRACTOR.
SO IT HAS NOT BEEN A CONSISTENT
WEEKLY PROGRESS REPORT WHICH IS
SOMETHING WE ARE WORKING ON.
WE MEET WITH THEM ON A REGULAR
BASIS.
I'LL BE MEETING WITH THEM
TOMORROW TO SEE IF THEY'RE ON A
THEY'RE NOT AN URGENCY PER DAY
FROM A FUNDING PERSPECTIVE AT
THIS POINT OR AND THIS IS THE
TYPE OF WORK THAT COMPARED TO
OTHER CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS CAN
OCCUR MORE YEAR ROUND.
SO IT DOESN'T NECESSARILY HAVE
TO BE DONE BY YOU KNOW, THE
SAME TIME THAT A ROAD PROJECT
WOULD TYPICALLY BE COMPLETED.
BUT THERE IS STILL INTEREST IN
TRYING TO COMPLETE THIS WORK
SOONER RATHER THAN LATER.
SO WE'RE WORKING WE KEEP
WORKING WITH THEM ABILITY OUR
ABILITY TO DO AT THAT POINT
JUST PROVIDE THE THE PROGRESS
AND THIS IS ACTUALLY WE HAVE
SOME BREAKING NEWS ON THAT
HASN'T BEEN RELATED TO THE
WEBSITE.
I GOT AN UPDATE TODAY THAT
HASN'T MADE ITS WAY TO THE TO
THE PROGRESS CHART HERE.
SO THIS IS INDICATING THAT AS
OF THE LAST UPDATE NINETEEN
JUST OVER NINETEEN PERCENT HAVE
BEEN CONVERTED.
WE ARE NOW AT OVER NINE HUNDRED
AND TWENTY TWO PERCENT I
BELIEVE AND THE THE ESTIMATE IS
THAT BY THE END OF THIS WEEK
ANOTHER THREE HUNDRED WILL BE
COMPLETED ON THAT WHICH WOULD
BRING US IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
OF THIRTY PERCENT.
SO THE NICE THING IS IS UNLIKE
INSTALLING FULL STREETLIGHT PCS
PRETTY MINIMAL WORK AND UNDER
THE IMPACT SECTION IT EVEN SAYS
THAT THE CONVERSION
INSTALLATION TO BE RELOCATION
WILL TYPICALLY BE RELATIVELY
SHORT TEMPORARY LANE CLOSURES
ARE THE TYPE OF MAN THAT'S A
TRAFFIC TYPICALLY INVOLVE.
WE DON'T I'M NOT SEEING ANY
NEED FOR FOR ROAD CLOSURES NOT
A LOT OF THIS ALL WORK ON
EXISTING POLES.
THERE'S NO NEED FOR UNDERGROUND
WORK OR FRANKLY AN OVERHEAD
WIRE WORK.
IT'S JUST SWAPPING OUT PICTURES
TO KIND OF SIMPLIFY.
SO THERE'S A RELATIVELY SIMPLE
WAY TO PUT IT BUT IT'S ACCURATE
AND I GUESS I'LL PAUSE THERE.
>> I'VE BEEN TALKING FOR A
WHILE AND MAYBE THIS QUESTIONS
ANY QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
I'VE BEEN LOOKING THROUGH THE
ENGAGE WEBSITE AND IT'S THERE'S
AN AMAZING AMOUNT
OF INFORMATION THE INTERACTIVE
MAP IS FANTASTIC.
RACHEL YEAH.
THANKS A LOT.
THERE IS THIS IS A COOL PROJECT
I MISSED WHEN YOU SAID WHERE
THE GRANT WAS FROM IF YOU COULD
REPEAT THAT.
>> YES I DID.
SO YOU DIDN'T I SAID OK SO IT
IS SO THE SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN
COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENT, SOME
SORT OF REGIONAL PLANNING
AGENCY IT'S BASED IN DETROIT.
IT COVERS SEVEN COUNTIES
INCLUDING WASHTENAW.
SO THEY KIND OF PUT A CALL OUT
FOR THIS PARTICULAR GRANT WHICH
IS ACTUALLY RELATIVELY NEW.
IT'S IT WAS NEW AS OF TWENTY
TWENTY ONE OR TWO POINT TWENTY
TWO YOU CALL THE
CARBON REDUCTION PROGRAM AND I
BELIEVE THAT GRANT I THINK THE
THE INFRASTRUCTURE AND JOBS ACT
AS THE SORT OF GENESIS OF THAT
GRANTS.
>> THAT'S PART OF WHY IT'S NEW.
YEAH, I WAS GOING TO ASK IF YOU
KNEW SPECIFICALLY WHAT IF IT
WAS PASSED THROUGH FUNDING AND
AND WHERE THE PASSTHROUGH CAME
FROM.
>> BUT I CAN I CAN LOOK THAT
THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION IT WAS THE
ADMINISTERING FEDERAL AGENCY,
SOME SORT OF THE REGIONAL
PLANNING AGENCY.
SO THEY PUT OUT THE CALL FOR
PROJECTS.
WE GAVE A SHORT APPLICATION AND
AGAIN BECAUSE OF SOME OF THE
THINGS I STATED EARLIER RETURN
ON INVESTMENT SUSTAINABILITY
GOALS.
YOU KNOW, AGAIN STREETLIGHTS
ARE NOT ALWAYS THOUGHT OF THE
TRANSPORTATION PROJECT BUT FOR
SOME REASON THIS DATA WE
CERTAINLY SEE IT AS SUCH AND WE
APPLIED AND IT WAS A
COMPETITIVE APPLICATION.
THEY GOT AWARDED SOME GREAT
YEAH.
>> AND JUST ONE OTHER QUICK
QUESTION THAT YOU MENTIONED
THAT YOU HAD A PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT SURVEY AND I'M
WONDERING IF YOU HAD ANY OTHER
FORMS OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
>> I'M THINKING ABOUT SOME
OF THE SOME OF THE STREETCAR
THING ARE THE TRAFFIC CALMING
PROJECTS FOR EXAMPLE, HAVE
THESE ALMOST INTERACTIVE
ELEMENTS OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
WHERE THERE'S A SIGN YOU'RE
TRAVELING DOWN THE STREET AND
THIS SEEMS LIKE A TYPE
OF PROJECT THAT WOULD HAVE
REALLY BENEFITED FROM A MODE
LIKE THAT WHERE PEOPLE MAYBE
COULD SEE LIKE TWO DIFFERENT
WATTAGES NEXT
TO EACH OTHER AND
THEN BE ASKED THE QUESTION IN
REAL TIME LIKE WHICH OF THESE
DO YOU PREFER OR SOMETHING LIKE
THAT YOU'RE STANDING GREAT WITH
OUR PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
I REALIZED THAT WE DID DO THAT
COOL I SAID SURVEY AND WITHOUT
INDICATING YOU KNOW WHAT THE
BASELINE OF INFORMATION WAS WE
ASKED FOR OUR SURVEY WE DID WAS
WE ASKED DTE TO INSTALL THE
DIFFERENT WATTAGE AND COLOR
TEMPERATURES THAT WE AGAIN UP
AND NONE OF THEM WERE THE
STANDARD FOUR THOUSAND K IT WAS
ALL IN THREE THOUSAND K WAS THE
ONE COLOR TEMPERATURE TWENTY
SEVEN HUNDRED IS WHAT ENDED UP
ON AND THE ORIGINAL OUTAGES
WERE FIFTY EIGHT WATTS AND
TWENTY NINE WATTS.
WE INSTALLED THAT COMBINATION
THAT'S FOR COMBINATION OF FOUR
TYPES OF WATTAGE AND
TEMPERATURES SO WE INSTALLED
FOUR PILOT LOCATIONS LIKE THAT
OF NEARBY EACH OTHER TO BE ABLE
TO DO THAT COMPARISON LIKE YOU
JUST ALLUDED TO ON TWO
DIFFERENT PARTS OF TOWN SO THAT
IT WASN'T YOU KNOW, EVERYONE
GOING TO YOU KNOW, JUST ONE
NEIGHBORHOOD OR HAVE YOU.
SO WE AND WE DID IT ACTUALLY
IT'S A BIT OF A TRADEOFF HERE
BUT WE DID IT LIKE IN THE DARK
TIME OF YEAR WINTER WINTERTIME
WHICH IS NOT NECESSARILY WHEN
YOU GET THERE WERE IN AREAS FOR
TRAFFIC.
A LOT OF DTG LIGHTS ARE OUTSIDE
OF OUR DOWNTOWN INHERENTLY
THERE'S LOTS OF TRAFFIC ANYWAY.
BUT AGAIN THERE WAS FIFTY SIX
SURVEY RESPONSES ACROSS THOSE
TWO SETS OF LOCATIONS THOSE
EIGHT LIGHTS AND TWO
NEIGHBORHOODS.
SO YEAH THAT THAT WAS THE THAT
YOU KNOW I THINK WE YEAH WE
SENT OUT POSTCARDS AND AND I
THINK WE ALSO THE BIGGEST THING
THAT I THINK UPTICK WAS AS YOU
MIGHT EXPECT PUBLISHING AND
LIVE TO KIND OF PUSH THAT THERE
IS A PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT ALONG
THESE LINES SO THAT I BROUGHT
IT UP TO FIFTY SIX FROM
WHATEVER LOWER NUMBER WAS AND
AND THEN BEYOND THAT I THINK
THE ONLY PUBLIC DISCUSSION YOU
CAN PROBABLY CORRECT ME IF I'M
WRONG BUT I BELIEVE WAS AT THE
HOUSE MEETINGS RELATED YOU
KNOW, ACCEPTING THIS GRANT AND
MOVING FORWARD.
BUT THAT'S THAT WAS KIND OF OUR
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT THOUGHT WAS I
THINK YOU SAID IT'S A EASIER TO
TO SEE AND IN THE IN THE FIELD
AS IT WERE, YOU KNOW, WE CAN
SHOW A PICTURE THAT SHOWS WHAT
POINTS AND HOW IT LOOKS LIKE IN
THEORY COMPARED TO A FOUR
THOUSAND K BUT I THINK SEEING
THEM IN THE FIELD I THINK IS
THERE ARE SOME DIFFERENTIATION.
I THINK AGAIN THAT THAT COLOR
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TWENTY SEVEN
HUNDRED AND THREE THOUSAND IS
RELATIVELY SMALL SO WANTED WAS
PROBABLY A BIGGER
DIFFERENTIATOR.
YEAH.
THANK YOU DEBORAH .
SO I USED TO BE ABLE TO SAY
THAT THIS WAS THE ITEM THAT
I'VE GOTTEN THE MOST EMAILS
ABOUT AS A COUNCIL PERSON BUT I
THINK THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
HAS NOW SURPASSED IT.
BUT BEFORE THAT THIS WAS
DEFINITELY AN ISSUE THAT WE GOT
THE MOST EMAIL THAT I'VE EVER
GOTTEN ON AN ISSUE PEOPLE FEEL
VERY STRONGLY ABOUT THE LIGHTS
THAT ARE OUTSIDE OF THEIR HOUSE
UNDERSTANDABLY.
AND SO I JUST WANTED TO SPEAK
TO A COUPLE OF THINGS THAT I
DIDN'T MENTION WHICH IS TRYING
TO BE AS CONSISTENT AS POSSIBLE
WITH OUR DARK SKY ORDINANCE
WHICH WE HAVE, WHICH IS REALLY
KIND OF AN UNFORTUNATE NAME
BECAUSE IT'S REALLY ABOUT
PUTTING LIGHT WHERE IT BELONGS
INSTEAD OF CASTING IT UPWARD
AND THE COLOR TEMPERATURE
CORRELATES A LOT TO THE WAY
THAT PEOPLE EXPERIENCE THE
LIGHT AND INDEED THE
VISIBILITY.
SO THERE'S A GLARE THAT CAN
COME OFF THE COLOR TEMPERATURE
LIGHTS.
DOES IT SOUND LIKE I NEED IT
OUT ON THIS?
YES, I DID.
>> SO ONE THING THAT YOU DIDN'T
MENTION, CYRUS, IS THAT THAT
YOU ALL WORKED WITH DTG TO MAKE
SURE THAT THEIR HOUSE SIDE
SHIELDS ON ALL THE LIGHTS AND
I'VE ALREADY BEEN GETTING SOME
FEEDBACK FROM RESIDENTS WHO
HAVE HAD THESE LIGHTS INSTALLED
AND ARE VERY HAPPY WITH THAT
SEEING THE LIGHT IS MUCH
BRIGHTER.
I MEAN IT'S SUCH A WEIRD
COMPARISON BECAUSE OFTEN WHAT
THEY'RE REPLACING IS KIND
OF OLD FADING SODIUM LIGHTS.
YEAH, THEY'RE DEFINITELY
NOTICEABLY BRIGHTER BUT NOT
SHINING INTO THE HOMES.
SO YOU KNOW, WE TECHNICALLY ON
THIS PROJECT DON'T HAVE TO
ADHERE TO THE DARK SKY.
OUR OWN DARK SKY ORDINANCE WHAT
KINDS OF REASONS?
BUT I THINK WE ARE ABLE TO GET
VERY CLOSE TO THAT MUCH CLOSER
WELL INDEED OF DC WOULD HAVE
DONE THIS ON THEIR OWN.
WE WOULD HAVE NOT BEEN
CONSISTENT AT ALL WITH OUR DARK
SKY ORDINANCE.
SO IT'S MUCH BETTER THAN WHAT
THEY WOULD HAVE DONE ON THEIR
OWN.
>> I APPRECIATE I THINK YOU'RE
RIGHT.
THERE ARE A LOT OF DETAILS TO
THIS AND LIKE THANK YOU IT WAS
EASY TO FALL DOWN THE RABBIT
HOLE ONCE YOU START PULLING
THAT THREAD BUT YEAH, ON THE
HOUSE SIDE SHEILD ELEMENT ALL I
HAD THAT IS SOMETHING THAT WE
WERE DOING ON A SORT OF AS
NEEDED BASIS BEFORE IF A
RESIDENT GENERALLY WHEN I WAS
NEWLY INSTALLED WHICH AGAIN IS
GENERALLY AN UNCONTROLLED
CROSSWALK WE WOULD AND WE WOULD
CONTACT OSCAR AND D AND TELL
THEIR CONTRACTORS OR STAFF
INSTALL HOUSE AND SHIELD AND
AMERICANS POINT WE HAD
PROACTIVE YOU KNOW WE DISCUSSED
THE IDEA OF JUST PROACTIVELY
SAYING LET'S PUT THEM ON ALL
THESE LIGHTS AND BECAUSE WE
KNEW EVEN THOUGH WE'RE GETTING
THE COLOR TEMPERATURE REALLY
CLOSE TO WHAT THE EXISTING
LIGHTS ARE, THE WHITE
DISTRIBUTION PATTERN IS STILL
DIFFERENT.
THERE IS STILL THAT WHOLE
PLACEBO EFFECT KIND OF THINK
OF LIKE YOU SOMEONE YOU SEE
SOMEONE WORKING OUTSIDE YOUR
HOUSE AND CHANGING A LIGHT AND
WHETHER OR NOT THE LIGHT
ACTUALLY FEELS DIFFERENT TO
YOU, YOU WORK WAS DONE SO YOU
HAVE QUESTIONS AND SO SO YEAH
WE HAVE INSTALLED APPS AND YEAH
.
YEAH.
THANKS FOR ADDING THAT EXTRA
CONTEXT IS THERE IS I DON'T
THINK THE MAP SHOWS WHEN THE
ST. HAVE BEEN CONVERTED.
RIGHT.
SO IS THERE A WAY THAT PEOPLE
WOULD KNOW IF THE STREETLIGHT
OUTSIDE THEIR HOUSE IS ALREADY
HAD THIS COMPLETED?
NOT FROM THIS MAP.
WE ARE WORKING WITH DTE TO
MAYBE GET THAT TYPE OF LEVEL
OF DETAIL.
WE RIGHT NOW ARE KIND
OF GETTING A SIMILAR LEVEL
OF NUMBER OF LIGHTS IN THE
GENERAL AREAS THAT ARE THERE
AND THEY'RE NOT PROVIDING LIKE
INDIVIDUAL LIGHT IDEAS AND THE
AND THE CONVERSION STATUS BUT
THE WHETHER OR NOT WE GET TO A
POINT WHERE WE CAN UPDATE ON
THE MAP THE WAY THAT PEOPLE
CAN, ONE WAY THAT PEOPLE CAN
TELL IS IF THEY WALK OUTSIDE TO
A LIGHT THAT'S BEEN THERE'S
ACTUALLY A STICKER UNDERNEATH.
IF YOU LOOK UP AT THE PICTURE
THERE IS INFORMATION THAT YOU
CAN SEE THAT'LL SAY FIFTY EIGHT
WHAT LED YOU TO LED SO I MEAN
IT DOESN'T NECESSARILY YEAH
THAT THAT'S I GUESS THAT'S
RELATED TO THE WAY AS OF RIGHT
NOW AND THEN UNLESS WE GET TO A
POINT WHERE WE'RE GETTING MORE
GRANULAR INFORMATION FROM DATA
THAT'S RIGHT NOW WE'RE WE'RE
KIND OF GIVING THIS THE SUMMARY
PROGRESS.
>> SO I'M JUST CURIOUS.
ALL RIGHT.
WELL THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
THE UPDATE.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S MOVE ON THEN.
TO THE SECOND TOPIC OF OUR
INFORMATION IN DISCUSSION
SECTION TONIGHT WHICH IS THE
LANE REDUCTION STUDY BY THE
TOOL GROUP AND LET'S SEE WHO IS
GOING TO PRESENT THIS AND I'M
GOING TO GET A NAME A PRINCIPAL
TRAFFIC ENGINEER FROM TOOL
DESIGN AND WORKING WITH TREVOR
TREVOR.
DO YOU HAVE ANY OPENING
COMMENTS OR SHOULD I DOVE INTO
I HAVE A SET OF SLIDES THAT'LL
TAKE YOU ALL THROUGH.
>> VERY GOOD.
YEAH.
THANK YOU.
HELLO EVERYBODY.
I'M TREVOR BRIGHTON.
I'M A TRANSPORTATION PLANNER ON
STAFF AT THE CITY ANN ARBOR.
I'M THE I'M THE PROJECT LEAD
FOR THE CITY FOR THIS PROJECT.
THIS PROJECT COMES ABOUT AT THE
AT THE BEHEST OF CITY COUNCIL A
COUPLE OF YEARS AGO PASSING A
RESOLUTION FOR US TO CONSIDER
SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS AND OTHER
NON MOTORIZED
COMFORT IMPROVEMENTS THAT COULD
BE AVAILABLE ON ON MULTILAYERED
CORRIDORS THROUGHOUT THE CITY
AND THEN GAVE US A DEADLINE
OF TWENTY THIRTY TO TO ADDRESS
OR TO EVALUATE ALL OF THE EACH
AND EVERY ONE OF THESE
CORRIDORS FOR THESE TYPES
OF IMPROVEMENTS.
PLEASE THE STAFF GOT TOGETHER
AND TOOK A LOOK AT AN APPROACH
TO THIS AND HOW WE APPROACH
THESE IN YEARS PAST AND DECIDED
THAT GIVEN THE NEW PLAN AND OUR
NEW POLICIES AND THINGS LIKE
THAT AND THE URGENCY FOR MANY
OF THESE QUARTERS THAT WE
WANTED TO GROUP THEM TOGETHER
AND AND TAKE A LOOK AT THEM ALL
TOGETHER AND ADVANCE THEM ALL
TO A CERTAIN DEGREE SO THAT
EACH AND EVERY ONE OF THESE IS
AVAILABLE TO FOR CONSIDERATION
FOR PICKUP PICKING UP AND
ADVANCING THESE DESIGNS WE'VE
FEEL FORTUNATE TO HAVE TOOL
DESIGN TO COME IN PARTNER WITH
US ON THE STUDY.
THEY HAVE DONE A NUMBER
OF THINGS THAT ARE FAIRLY NOVEL
TASKS FOR THEM.
WE ARE ASKING THEM TO UPDATE A
METHODOLOGY FOR CONSIDERING
ROAD ROAD REDESIGNS WHICH WE
HAVE A HISTORY OF IN THE PAST
BUT BUT VARIETY THINGS ARE ABLE
TO ABLE TO BE RECONSIDERED AND
ADVANCED AND AND SO WE'RE
ADVANCING THE METHODOLOGY WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE THEM HELP US COME
UP WITH SOME CONCEPTUAL DESIGNS
AND THEN AND THEN THAT WILL BE
THE PROCESS.
>> SO IT WILL LAST ABOUT A YEAR
AND WE WILL BE STARTING IT
STARTING NOW AND THEN HAVE MORE
OF THE CONCEPTUAL DESIGNS READY
FOR PUBLIC VIEW AND COMMENT AND
THINGS LIKE THAT IN THE NEW
YEAR.
I THINK I HAVE GONE ON LONG
ENOUGH FOR THAT FOR THE CONTEXT
I'M VERY HAPPY TO PRESENT LUCY
GIBSON WITH DREW PARKER
SUPPORT.
HE'S
THE DEPUTY PROJECT MANAGER
ON THIS PROJECT.
THEY HAVE A SERIES OF SLIDES
THAT WILL DWELL MOSTLY ON THE
METHODOLOGY PORTION OF IT WHICH
IS THE THE THING THAT HAS BEEN
THE MOST ACTIVE FOR OR FOR THIS
PART OF THE PROJECT AND THEN
GIVE YOU AN OUTLINE FOR FOR THE
REST OF IT AS WELL.
SO WITHOUT FURTHER DO LIZZY,
PLEASE PLEASE TELL US ABOUT
ABOUT THE TWO TWO WE'RE CALLING
IT A TWO HOUR TO THE ANIBA AND
ARBOR ROAD RIGHT SIZING
PROJECT.
THESE THESE TYPES
OF CONFIGURATIONS ARE OFTEN
TALKED ABOUT AS DIETZE IT'S AN
UNCOMFORTABLE METAPHOR WE'RE
TRYING TO AVOID.
SO WHO ARE TO IT?
IT SAVES US FROM SAYING SUCH A
LONG TITLE AS WELL.
SO ANYWAY WITHOUT PLEASE LIZZIE
THANK YOU.
>> SO I WILL GET MY SCREEN
SHARED HERE NOW ARE YOU ABLE TO
SEE THAT AND LET ME GET THE
SLIDE SHOW STARTED
THOUGH AND
THEN I KNOW I WANT TO.
ALL RIGHT.
CAN YOU NOW SEE THE SLIDE IN A
FULL SCREEN LOOKS GOOD SETUP
GOOD.
SORRY STICK TO
HAPPY TO SHARE
OUR METHODOLOGY THAT WE'RE YOU
KNOW, WE'RE REALLY JUST IN THE
EARLY STAGES SO I'D WELCOME
INPUT I THINK AS WE GO THROUGH
IF YOU HAVE A BURNING KIND
OF CLARIFYING QUESTION, I'D SAY
RAISE YOUR HAND AND I'LL TRY TO
ADDRESS IT BECAUSE I DON'T WANT
PEOPLE FEELING LIKE THEY'VE
MISSED SOMETHING IMPORTANT AND
THEN WE'LL HAVE TIME FOR
DISCUSSION AT THE END.
SO I'M THINKING WE SHOULD TAKE
20 TO 30 SO SO HERE'S AN AGENDA
FOR TONIGHT.
>> JUST A LITTLE BIT OF AN
OVERVIEW OF THE PROJECT AND
SOME BACKGROUND AND THEN GET
INTO THE PRIMARY PART OF THE
DISCUSSION WILL BE ON OUR
METHODOLOGY TO LOOK AT
RECONFIGURE ANALYSIS AND THEN
JUST TALK ABOUT OUR NEXT STEPS
.
>> SO THE PROJECT PURPOSE IS TO
EVALUATE 10 OF THE CITY'S MULTI
LANE ROADWAYS AND CONSIDER ROAD
RECONFIGURATIONS THAT CAN
REDUCE SPEED BETTER ORGANIZED
TRAFFIC ADDRESS SYSTEMIC SAFETY
ISSUES FOR ALL ROAD USERS AND
INCORPORATE FUTURE PLANNED
TRANSIT AND BICYCLE
INFRASTRUCTURE.
SO I THINK THIS IS DIRECTLY
FROM THE CITY'S CHARGE OF THE
STUDY.
SO IT MAY NOT BE NEW TO YOU ON
THIS SLIDE.
I HAVE A MAP SHOWING ALL THE
STUDY CORRIDORS AND I'LL JUST
READ THROUGH THEM AS WELL.
STADIUM BOULEVARD IS NUMBER
ONE.
THESE WERE THE NUMBERS ARE ALSO
FROM THE STUDIES I REPEAT ARE
NOT RANKED OR ANYTHING.
THEY DON'T LIKE ANY RECRUITING
THE NORTH POLE AND WEST STADIUM
BOULEVARD PACARD ST. EISENHOWER
PARKWAY, MAIN STREET AND ANN
ARBOR, SALEEN STATE STREET
BROADWAY AND PLYMOUTH ROAD,
HURON PARKWAY GREEN ROAD AND
FULLAH ROAD.
A FEW OF THESE CORRIDORS KIND
OF CONNECT TO EACH OTHER BUT
THOSE ARE I THINK OUR
UNDERSTANDING IS THESE ARE ALL
THE MULTI LANE ROADWAYS IN THE
CITY'S JURISDICTION SO AND
WE'VE ONE OF THE THINGS WE'VE
LOOKED AT IS THE PAST WORK
THAT'S BEEN DONE BY THE CITY.
SO IN 2005 THERE WAS A STUDY
OF A NUMBER OF CORRIDORS AND
THE CRITERIA THAT THEY USED
WERE TRAFFIC DATA HEAVILY AND
LOOKING FOR IN THIS CASE
STREETS THAT HAD A MAXIMUM
OF 800 VEHICLES PER HOUR AS A
GOOD CANDIDATE FOR A ROAD DIET
THOUGH NOT CERTAINLY A HARD
RULE THEY LOOKED CRAFT DATA AND
OBVIOUSLY THE KINDS OF CRASHES
THAT A ROADWAY RECONFIGURATION
WOULD BENEFIT FROM REDUCING
CRASHES.
AND ANOTHER THING IS DRIVEWAY
DENSITY WITH THE MORE FREQUENT
DRIVEWAY DENSITY WOULD INDICATE
MORE BENEFIT FROM POTENTIALLY A
RECONFIGURATION.
IT WOULD PROVIDE A CENTER
OF TURN LANE AND THE IMAGES ON
THE RIGHT SHOW A COUPLE
EXAMPLES FROM THESE REPORTS
FROM ONE OF THE CORRIDORS WHERE
THERE IS AN EXISTING CONDITION
WITH MULTIPLE TURN LANES IN
SOME CASES AND THEN PROPOSED
CONDITIONS SHOWING A REDUCTION
IN THE TRAVEL LANES AND THE
ADDITION OF BIKE LANES AND IN
PARTICULAR THE LOWER FIGURE IS
WHAT WE THINK OF AS A CLASSIC
ROAD DIET WHERE THE EXISTING
CONDITION IN THIS CASE WAS FOR
TRAVEL LANES TO IN EACH
DIRECTION AND THE PROPOSED
FUTURE CONDITION WAS ONE TRAVEL
LANE IN EACH DIRECTION A CENTER
LEFT TURN LANE AND BICYCLE
LANES.
SO AGAIN THERE'S A LOT
OF DIFFERENCES IN THE EXISTING
CONDITIONS BUT THAT'S ONE THAT
TYPICALLY LOOKED OUT FOR THOSE
TYPES OF ROADS.
IN 2019 THERE WAS ANOTHER SET
OF CORRIDOR WERE LOOKED AT AND
THE CONSIDERATIONS HERE WERE
REALLY DREW HEAVILY FROM THE
EFFECTS OF A ROAD INFORMATION
GUIDE WHICH PROVIDES MUCH MORE
DETAILED PROCESS OF LOOKING TO
GIVE GUIDANCE OF LOOKING FOR
WHERE WHAT ARE GOOD CANDIDATES
FOR ROAD DIETS AND AGAIN IN
THESE CASES ROAD DIETS ARE
DEFINED AS TAKING A FOUR TO
FIVE LANE ROAD AND NARROWING IT
REDUCING THE TRAVEL LANES TO
HAVE THREE LANES TYPICALLY A
CENTER LEFT TURN LANE AND THEN
A ONE TRAVEL LANE IN EACH
DIRECTION WITH SPACE AVAILABLE
FOR OTHER USES SO THAT THE
GRAPHIC I'M SHOWING HERE ON THE
RIGHT IS A FAIRLY DETAILED FLOW
CHART.
I'M NOT GOING TO GO INTO DETAIL
BUT IT DOES EXPLAIN HOW YOU
WOULD START WITH THE ADT, THE
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC ON THE
ROAD AND SORT OF INTO DIFFERENT
BUCKETS OF YOU KNOW, LOWER
TRAFFIC ROADS WOULD BE EASY AND
NOT REALLY NEED FURTHER
ANALYSIS TO DO A ROAD TARGET
AND THEN AS YOU GET HIGHER YOU
DO A MORE DETAILED LOOK AT EACH
CORRIDOR AND DETERMINE THE
POSSIBILITY OF MITIGATING ANY
TRAFFIC CONGESTION AND THAT
KIND OF THING.
AND IT ALSO GIVES SORT OF A
HARD LINE OF OVER TWENTY FIVE
THOUSAND EIGHTY IS NOT A
CANDIDATE FOR ROAD DIET AND
THEN FURTHER BEYOND US THERE'S
A MICHIGAN DOTTI ROAD TYPE
CHECKLIST.
IT WAS USED IN A STUDY SO AND
THAT WAS SOME OF THE FACTORS
FROM NOW INCLUDE WHETHER THAT'S
AN EMERGENCY SERVICE ROUTE,
WHETHER IT'S AN EXTREME ON
ATTAINMENT AREA OR WHETHER
FEDERAL FUNDS WERE USED FOR
ROAD IMPLEMENTATION.
SO IT'S A DIFFERENT SET
OF CHARACTERISTICS ON THIS
SLIDE.
WE'RE TALKING A LITTLE BIT MORE
ABOUT THE METHODOLOGY WE ARE
PROPOSING FOR, YOU KNOW, KIND
OF UP TO DATE AND WHAT IT'S
REALLY INSPIRED BY SOME MORE
RECENT WORK THAT HAS BEEN
PUBLISHED BY THE FEDERAL
HIGHWAY.
WELL, THE NATIONAL COOPERATIVE
HIGHWAY RESEARCH PROGRAM WHICH
WE CAN SEE THAT WE HAVE A
QUESTION.
>> YEAH, SORRY.
YEP.
OH YES.
>> COULD YOU JUST CLARIFY ON
THE PREVIOUS SLIDE THOSE ARE
SIMPLY RECOMMENDATIONS OR
GUIDELINES THERE IS NOT THE OK,
ABSOLUTELY.
>> IT'S GUIDELINES SO AND IT'S
NOT A REQUIREMENT.
THERE'S NO YOU KNOW, MOST MOST
OF THESE KIND OF THINGS ARE
GUIDELINES AND GIVE DIRECTION
BUT THAT I THINK DIFFERENT A
LOT OF REQUIREMENTS.
SO THANKS.
SO THE CURRENT APPROACH THAT WE
WANT TO BRING TO LOOKING AT
THESE CORRIDORS LOOKS AT ONE
OF THE FEATURES OF THIS NEW
WORK THAT'S BEEN PUBLISHED AND
NC HRP TEN THIRTY SIX THAT'S
THE PUBLISHED BY THE
TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH BOARD
THAT DOES A LOT OF , YOU KNOW,
BEST PRACTICES AND PUBLIC
PUBLICATIONS ON THE ROAD
RECONFIGURATIONS.
ONE OF THE KEY FACTORS FOR THIS
IS TO DO WHAT WE CALL A 16 HOUR
FRAMEWORK RATHER THAN ONLY
LOOKING AT THE PEAK TRAFFIC
PERIODS AND GIVES A LITTLE MORE
THOUGHT TO CAN WE TOLERATE SOME
CONGESTION DURING THE PEAK
HOURS OR HOW MUCH CAN WE
TOLERATE IN ORDER TO GET SOME
OF THE BENEFITS?
AND IT ALSO CONSIDERS THE
CONSEQUENCES OF TOO MUCH
ROADWAY CAPACITY ESPECIALLY FOR
ALL THOSE HOURS OF THE DAY THAT
MAYBE YOU DON'T NEED THE
CAPACITY AND THERE'S A GRAPHIC
AND INFOGRAPHICS ON THE RIGHT
THAT'S DRAWN FROM THIS REPORT
THAT OUTLINES SOME OF THESE
ISSUES OF TOO MUCH WEIGHT
CAPACITY OF ONE OF THEM IS
HIGHER SPEEDS.
WHEN THERE'S EXCESS CAPACITY
THERE'S MORE OPPORTUNITY TO
PASS AND IT LEADS TO HIGHER
TRAFFIC SPEEDS WHICH CAN BE A
REAL HAZARD TO ALL THE ROAD
USERS.
IT MAKES STREETS LESS SAFE FOR
PEOPLE WALKING AND BIKING IT
CAN MAKE LONGER WAIT TIMES FOR
ALL MODES AND STREETS TAKE UP
SUCH A LARGE AMOUNT OF SPACE
THAT'S REALLY VALUABLE REAL
ESTATE THAT I DEVOTING IT TO
VEHICLE CAPACITY THAT'S NOT
NEEDED.
IT'S NOT REALLY IN THE BEST
INTEREST OF THE CITY HEALTH.
SO I'M NOW SHOWING A SLIDE THAT
SHOWS UP REALLY COMPARES WHAT
HAS BEEN A PAST APPROACH BY ANN
ARBOR AND MANY OTHER PLACES
AROUND THE COUNTRY VERSUS THE
APPROACH THAT WE'RE TAKING IN
THE STUDY IN THE HISTORIC
APPROACH IT WAS REALLY A
QUESTION OF MOTOR VEHICLE
TRAFFIC OPERATIONS THAT'S LIKE
THE LEVEL OF CONGESTION AS THE
KEY INDICATOR OF CAN A ROAD
DIET BE DONE OR CAN IT WORK
WHERE OUR APPROACH NOW IS GOING
TO TAKE A BROADER FOCUS.
OF COURSE IT'LL CONSIDER
CONGESTION BUT ALSO FOCUS
SAFETY AND COMMUNITY GOALS AND
ALSO CONSIDER THOSE NEGATIVE
CONSEQUENCES OF TOO MUCH
CAPACITY IN MORE CONVENTIONAL
APPROACHES THAT WE JUST
REVIEWED.
THERE'S A TYPICAL FOCUS ON THE
PEAK HOUR OR EVEN THE PEAK
FIFTEEN MINUTES OF TRAFFIC
OPERATIONS WE'RE IN THIS
APPROACH.
WE'LL LOOK MORE AT A TWENTY
FOUR HOUR OR
16 HOUR EVALUATION
FRAMEWORK AND A THIRD
DIFFERENCE IS THAT IN THE
TYPICAL APPROACHES IN THE PAST
FOR ROAD DIETS THE THOUGHT IS
THAT YOUR FIRST LOOK AT WHAT
MOTOR VEHICLES NEED AND THEN
USE THE LEFTOVER SPACE FOR
OTHER THINGS THAT THE COMMUNITY
MIGHT WANT TO HAVE ON THEIR
STREETS LIKE SIDEWALK BIKE
LANES OR STREET STREETS.
AND IN MICHIGAN IT'S A MORE
HOLISTIC LOOK WHERE YOU LOOK AT
THE IDEAL SPACES NEEDED FOR ALL
THE MODES AND TO ACHIEVE THE
COMMUNITY'S VISION SO JUST
CONSIDERING A LOT OF DIFFERENT
FACTORS ALL AT ONCE.
>> SO AS WE'RE LOOKING AT THESE
THREE AT THE TEN DIFFERENT
CORRIDORS WE HAVE THREE MAIN
STEPS THAT WILL BE TAKING THE
FIRST SCREENING WHERE WE'LL BE
LOOKING AT AGAIN KIND OF LIKE
WHAT'S DONE IN THAT FLOWCHART
WHERE WE LOOK AT WHERE ARE THE
PLACES THAT SEEM CLEARLY
SUITABLE FOR ROADWAY
RECONFIGURATION AND WHAT THAT
RECONFIGURATION BE AND THEN THE
CORRIDORS IT MIGHT BE MORE
CHALLENGING WHERE WE KNOW THAT
THERE'LL BE MORE OF AN IMPACT
TO TRAFFIC CONGESTION AND OTHER
THINGS.
WE'LL LOOK AT MITIGATION.
WHAT ARE SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT COULD BE DONE TO MAKE THE
IMPACTS MORE ACCEPTABLE?
AND THEN THE THIRD STEP THE
STUDY WILL BE TO DO CONCEPT
DESIGN TO RECOMMENDED FOR THE
RECOMMENDED STRATEGY.
>> SO I'M GOING TO GO THROUGH
EACH OF THESE STEPS AND WE'LL
HAVE AN EXAMPLE APPLICATION
WITH ONE OF THE CORRIDORS.
SO NOW I'M SHOWING A SLIDE
OF THE SCREENING PROCESS THAT
WILL USE AGAIN IT'S FOLLOWING
THIS ONE REPORT METHODOLOGY
PRETTY CLOSELY IF WE ADAPTED A
LITTLE BIT AS NEEDED.
BUT THERE'S FOUR BASIC STEPS IN
THIS PROCESS.
FIRST WE ACTUALLY START OUT
CONSIDERING WHAT ARE THE
POTENTIAL RECONFIGURED CROSS
SECTIONS SO WE KNOW WHAT THE
EXISTING ONES A LOT OF THESE
ARE TO TEND TO BE FIVE LANE
STREETS WITH TWO LANES IN EACH
DIRECTION TO TURN LANES AND
WHAT WOULD MAKE SENSE FOR A
RECONFIGURED STREET AND TO
THINK ABOUT THAT WILL LOOK AT
THE CITY'S OTHER PLANS.
YOU KNOW, THERE'S TRANSIT
CORRIDORS ARE MAPPED OUT.
YOU HAVE BIKE NETWORK MAPPED
OUT AND WILL BRING IN ALL THAT
INFORMATION TO DETERMINE WHAT
WOULD BE AN OPTIMAL FUTURE
CROSS SECTION AND THEN WE'RE
GOING TO COLLECT EXISTING
CONDITIONS SPEED AND VOLUME
DATA.
WE'LL HAVE WHAT WE CALL
ACCOUNTS AUTOMATIC TRAFFIC
RECORDER THAT SHOULD BE OUT ANY
MOMENT NOW.
WE'RE HOPING AND IT WILL
COLLECT HOURLY DATA THROUGHOUT
A SEVEN DAY PERIOD.
SO HAVE A REALLY GOOD HANDLE ON
WHAT THE DAILY PATTERNS ARE
HOURLY PATTERNS AND THEN THE
THIRD STEP WILL BE WE'LL LOOK
AT THE BASELINE SIGNAL CAPACITY
FOR BOTH THE EXISTING CONDITION
AND THE PROPOSED CONDITIONS
THAT WE, YOU KNOW, THINK
OF WOULD BE THE OPTIMAL AGAIN
BASED ON WHAT THE CITY'S PLANS
ARE AND THEN WE'LL COMPARE WHAT
THOSE OPERATIONS ARE TO THE
THRESHOLDS FOR ROADWAY
RECONFIGURATION.
AND WHAT THIS MEANS IS AND I'LL
SHOW YOU AGAIN SHOWED THE
EXAMPLE BUT WHAT WHAT IS A
TOLERABLE CONDITION IN TERMS
OF ROAD TRAFFIC BEING A LITTLE
CONGESTED FOR A CERTAIN NUMBER
OF HOURS OF THE DAY OR DO WE
NEED TO THINK ABOUT ALTERNATE
ROUTES AND ALTERNATE MODES OR
WHATNOT?
AND SO IF WE'RE BELOW THAT
THRESHOLD, A TYPICAL THRESHOLD
FOR THIS TYPE OF ANALYSIS WOULD
BE TO POTENTIALLY THINK THAT
THERE COULD BE FOUR HOURS IN A
GIVEN DAY THAT CONGESTION WOULD
BE TOLERATED GIVEN THE OTHER
BENEFITS.
SO MAYBE TWO HOURS IN THE
MORNING OR TWO IN THE EVENING
OR YOU KNOW, IT MIGHT BE
DIFFERENT ON DIFFERENT
CORRIDORS IF WE'RE BELOW THAT
THRESHOLD WE'D PROCEED FOR THAT
QUARTER TO GO CONCEPT DESIGN IF
WE'RE LESS THAN THAT THRESHOLD
WE MIGHT LOOK AT SOME TAKE A
LITTLE DRILL CLOSER LOOK AT
THAT PARTICULAR CORRIDOR ABOUT
IN PARTICULAR HOW COULD WE
CHANGE SIGNAL TIMING SOME OTHER
FACTORS TO MAKE MORE REFINED
ADJUSTMENTS TO WHAT THE
CAPACITY COULD BE AND COULD WE
GET TO THAT ACCEPTABLE LEVEL
OF FOUR HOURS OR LESS
OF CONGESTION PER DAY WITH
MAKING SOME TIMING CHANGES?
>> AND IF NOT, THEN WE GO TO
THE MITIGATION SO SHOW WE HAVE
AN EXAMPLE TO SHARE.
WE'RE LOOKING AT PACARD STREET
ON BETWEEN EISENHOWER PARKWAY
AND NINETY FOUR IS THE THE
WHOLE CORRIDOR WE'RE LOOKING AT
THIS PARTICULAR LOCATION THAT
WE FOCUSED ON IS NEAR EASY
STREET WHERE THERE WAS SOME
TRAFFIC DATA COLLECTED THAT
WE'RE ABLE TO USE.
IT'S A LITTLE OUTDATED.
WE'RE GOING TO BE GETTING NEW
DATA BUT FOR THE PURPOSES
OF EXAMPLE THAT'S WHAT WE'VE
USED SO FIRST WE'LL LIKE LOOK
AT THE EXISTING CONDITIONS FOR
THE CORRIDOR IN THIS CASE ON
PACARD STREET WE HAVE TO TRAVEL
LANES IN EACH DIRECTION WITH
THE LEFT TURN TO A CENTER LEFT
TURN LANES.
THERE ARE CONVENTIONAL BIKE
LANES AND SOMEWHAT NARROW
SIDEWALKS.
THE SPEED LIMIT IS THIRTY FIVE
MILES AN HOUR AND I HAVE AN
IMAGE HERE THAT SHOWS THE
CROSS-SECTION AGAIN WHICH HAS
TEN FOOT TRAVEL LANES, A TEN
FOOT LEFT TURN LANE, FIVE FEET
BIKE LANES, FOUR FOOT
SIDEWALKS.
SO IT'S REALLY A CROSS SECTION
WHERE ALL THE FEATURES ARE AT
THEIR MINIMUM WIDTH BUT THAT'S
WHAT WE HAVE NOW.
SO THEN THE NEXT STEP WE MIGHT
TAKE IT THIS STREET AND I'M
SWITCHING TO THE NEXT RIGHT
HERE WE WOULD BE THINKING ABOUT
WHAT WOULD BE A MORE OPTIMAL
CROSS SECTION IF THE ROAD WAS
GOING TO BE RECONFIGURED.
SO SOME OF THE THINGS WE'LL
THINK ABOUT WOULD BE IN THE
VISION ZERO PLAN.
THERE ARE DIFFERENT AND HIGH
INJURY NETWORKS MAPPED UP IN
THIS PARTICULAR STREET AS A
TIER TWO HIGH INJURY NETWORK.
IT'S NOT THE HIGHEST ONE BUT
IT'S A FAIRLY HIGH QUARTER WITH
A LOT OF INJURIES.
THIS QUARTER IS ALSO PROPOSED
AS AN ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
MAJOR BIKE ROUTE AND IT'S HAS
PRIORITY TRANSIT SERVICE
CORRIDOR WHICH IS YOU KNOW, NOT
BRT, NOT NECESSARILY A FULL
RIGHT OF WAY AROUND BUT SOME
IMPROVEMENTS TO TRANSIT.
SO WHAT I HAVE AN IMAGE HERE IS
A POSSIBLE FUTURE CROSS
SECTION.
OBVIOUSLY THE SYSTEM FOR
EXAMPLE PURPOSES ONLY YOU KNOW
WE MAKE MAY ALL TOGETHER THINK
OF SOMETHING DIFFERENT FOR THIS
CORRIDOR WHEN WE GET INTO THE
STUDY BUT IN THIS CASE WE ARE
SHOWING TWO TRAVEL LANES CHANGE
DIRECTION AT ELEVEN FEET AT
CENTER TURN LANE AT 11 FEET AND
THEN FIVE AND A HALF FEET
BUFFERS TO SEPARATE BIKE LANES
FROM TRAVEL LANES AND AN EIGHT
FOOT BIKE EACH DIRECTION.
SO THIS IS AND FOR THE MOST
PART WE LOOK TO ACCOMMODATE A
FUTURE CROSS SECTION WITHIN THE
SAME CURVES FOR THIS FIRST
LOOK.
I MEAN OVER TIME MAYBE FULL
RECONSTRUCTION MIGHT HAPPEN
WHICH YOU COULD HAVE DIFFERENT
CURVE LOCATIONS BUT WITH THE
COST AND OPPORTUNITIES TO
RECONFIGURE A ROAD BY KEEPING
THE CURVE LANES TOGETHER ARE SO
GREAT THAT WE WOULD WANT TO,
YOU KNOW, LOOK AT WHAT CAN YOU
FITTING IN WITHOUT CHANGING
CURVES.
SO IN THIS CASE THE SIDEWALKS
ARE NOT PROPOSING IN THIS
EXAMPLE CHANGES TO THAT.
SO SO NOW I'M GOING TO SHOW A
KIND OF A BUSY SLIDE.
SO THIS IS SHOWING A CHART
OF AGAIN I TALKED ABOUT HOW
WE'RE GOING TO BE COLLECTING
DATA FROM EACH STREET.
THIS IS USING OLD DATA.
IT'S KIND OF OUTDATED BUT IT'S
JUST AGAIN FOR PURPOSES
OF EXAMPLE, THESE ARE HOURLY
TRAFFIC VOLUMES.
WE HAVE GOING FROM TWENTY FOUR
HOURS OF THE DAY SHOWN FOR THE
WESTBOUND TRAFFIC AND DARK BLUE
LINES AND THE EASTBOUND HOURLY
TRAFFIC IN LIGHTER BLUE THE
TRAFFIC OBVIOUSLY IS VERY LOW
AT NIGHTTIME BUT IT RISES IN
BOTH THE MORNING AND AFTERNOON
PEAK IN THE MORNING.
IT'S HEAVIER IN THE WESTBOUND
DIRECTION IN THE AFTERNOON,
HEAVIER IN THE EASTBOUND
DIRECTION.
THE HOURLY VOLUMES ARE IN THE
ORDER OF AROUND ELEVEN HUNDRED
TO THIRTEEN HUNDRED CARS PER
HOUR DURING THOSE PEAK HOURS
AND THAT'S PROBABLY A TYPICAL
PATTERN AND A LOT OF THE
CORRIDORS THEN ALSO ON THIS
CHART ARE A COUPLE OF SOLID
LINES AND WHAT THESE LINES ARE
SHOWING IS SORT OF A ROUGH
ESTIMATE OF CAPACITY FOR HOURLY
TRAFFIC.
SO A GOOD APPLES TO APPLES
COMPARISON OF WHAT WE'RE SEEING
IN THE DATA FOR BOTH EXISTING
CONDITIONS WHERE WE HAVE FOR
TRAVEL LANES JUST THE TOP LINE
IT'S A LITTLE OVER FOURTEEN
HUNDRED VEHICLES PER HOUR AND
THEN WHAT WOULD THE HOURLY
CAPACITY BE FOR A THREE LANE
ROADWAY MEANING ONE TRAVELING
IN EACH DIRECTION LEFT HER
LANES AND THAT'S ABOUT ELEVEN
HUNDRED VEHICLES PER HOUR.
THESE NUMBERS ARE JUST TAKEN
FROM AVERAGES PUBLISHED I THINK
IN THE END THEY CERP REPORT
THEY'RE NOT SUPER REFINED BUT
WHEN WE LOOK AT THOSE NUMBERS
WHAT WE SEE IS FROM THE
EXISTING CONDITIONS THE ROADWAY
IS UNDER CAPACITY ALL HOURS
OF THE DAY FOR 24 HOURS IT'S
ALL UNDER CAPACITY AND THAT'S
THIS CHART AT THE BOTTOM
SHOWING THAT THE THREE LANE
SCENARIO WOULD REDUCE CAPACITY
SUCH THAT THERE'D BE FIVE HOURS
OF THE DAY WHERE TRAFFIC
VOLUMES WOULD EXCEED CAPACITY
UNDER THIS SCENARIO UNDER THE
ESTIMATES OF CAPACITY THAT WE
HAVE THAT OUR VERY KIND
OF GENERIC AND SOMEWHAT
CONSERVATIVE.
SO GIVEN WE'RE THINKING ABOUT
WELL MAYBE WE'D WANT TO
TOLERATE A FOUR HOURS
OF CONGESTION PER DAY, WE'RE
ACTUALLY JUST ABOVE THAT
THRESHOLD.
SO WHAT THIS WOULD TRIGGER IS
JUST TO TAKING A LITTLE MORE
REFINED LOOK AT WHAT IS THE
ACTUAL CAPACITY ON THE STREET
AT THESE INTERSECTIONS BECAUSE
THESE ARE THE SOLID LINES THAT
SHOW CAPACITY ASSUME A ROUGH
ESTIMATE OF FORTY PERCENT BRENE
TIME FOR EACH FOR EIGHT FOR THE
MAIN THOROUGHFARE WHICH IS
QUITE CONSERVATIVE
OFTEN ON A
MAJOR STREET YOU HAVE QUITE A
BIT MORE OF THE TIME OF EACH
SIGNAL CYCLE WHICH IS REALLY
WHAT GOVERNS CAPACITY MIGHT BE
MORE LIKE 50 OR 60 PERCENT
GREEN TIME.
SO AGAIN THIS IS A CONSERVATIVE
ASSUMPTION ON CAPACITY.
SO WHAT WE DO I'M JUST SHOWING
THE NEXT SIDE WHERE WE THINK
TAKE A CLOSER LOOK AT THAT
CORRIDOR AND HOW THE SIGNALS
ARE OPERATING.
WE OFTEN WOULD FIND AND AGAIN
THIS IS AN EXAMPLE BUT DURING
THE PEAK HOURS THAT THE WAY THE
SIGNALS OPERATE PROVIDES QUITE
A BIT MORE GREEN TIME TO THAT
MAJOR THOROUGHFARES, THAT
ACTUALLY MEANS THAT IN THIS
CASE WE'D HAVE ONLY ONE HOUR
OF THE DAY WOULD BE
OVERCAPACITY OPERATIONS.
SO SO OUR FIRST IS JUST LOOKING
AT SORT OF GENERIC ASSUMPTIONS
IF WE DON'T MEET THE THRESHOLDS
OF FOUR HOURS OF CONGESTION PER
DAY, WE'D TAKE A CLOSER LOOK AT
THE SIGNAL OPERATIONS AND IN
THIS EXAMPLE WE GOT DOWN TO
WOULD THERE BE ONLY ONE HOUR
OF PER DAY WHERE THE TRAFFIC
WOULD EXCEED CONGESTION?
SO UNDER THIS METHOD THAT WOULD
BE FELT TO BE A GOOD
RECOMMENDATION AND TO PROCEED
WITH ROAD RECONFIGURATION.
SO HOWEVER, THERE MIGHT BE
CORRIDORS THAT WE HAVE THAT
WOULD WE'D STILL LOOKING AT THE
MORE REFINED ANALYSIS WE'D
STILL FIND THAT MAYBE MORE MORE
THAN FOUR HOURS PER DAY WOULD
BE CONGESTED AND THAT'S WHAT
WE'RE CALLING A MITIGATION
STEP.
WE'LL TAKE A CLOSER LOOK AT
THOSE CORRIDORS.
WE REALLY DON'T KNOW HOW MANY
THERE WILL BE AT THIS POINT
BECAUSE WE'RE JUST STARTING
FROM SCRATCH.
BUT WE'D TAKE A CLOSER LOOK TO
SEE WHAT ARE THE TRADE AND
BENEFITS OF ROADWAY
RECONFIGURATION AND WHAT ARE
THE OPPORTUNITIES TO MITIGATE
IT.
SO THE STEPS IN THIS PROJECT
WOULD BE AGAIN TO DOCUMENT THE
GOALS FOR EACH CORRIDOR STEP
NUMBER ONE DOCUMENT AND ARBOR
MOVING TOGETHER QUARTER GOALS
RELATED TO RECONFIGURATION AND
REALLY TAKE A CLOSE LOOK AND
CONSIDER SHOULD WE MOVE FORWARD
WITH RECONFIGURATION?
NO, SURE.
WHICH WILL TAKE A CLOSE LOOK AT
THE TRAFFIC PATTERNS AND ROUTE
CHARACTERISTICS THAT MIGHT
SUPPORT THE POTENTIAL TO REDUCE
PEAK HOUR VEHICLE TRAFFIC.
THAT WOULD BE THINGS LIKE THE
MODE SPLIT THE TRIP LENGTH, THE
PURPOSE AND THE POTENTIAL FOR
BIKE AND PEDESTRIAN AND TRANSIT
USE AND POTENTIALLY LAND USE
CHANGES.
A THIRD STEP IN HERE WOULD BE
TO CALCULATE THE PERSON
THROUGHPUT FOR BOTH THE
EXISTING AND POTENTIAL
RECONFIGURE CROSS SECTIONS TO
THINK ABOUT OUR WEIGHT
PROVIDING CAPACITY FOR PEOPLE
MAYBE NOT AS MUCH FOR VEHICLES
BUT WILL WE PROVIDE THE SORT
OF MOBILITY NEEDED AND WHAT
WOULD THAT LOOK LIKE?
NUMBER FOUR WILL LOOK A LOT
OF SAFETY WILL IDENTIFY
SPEEDING AND CRASH PATTERNS AND
CONFLICTION IMPACTS TO
EMERGENCY ROUTES POTENTIALLY
AFFECTED BY RECONFIGURATION.
SO IN CONSIDERING ALL THE USUAL
RECONFIGURATION LEAD TO GREATER
SAFETY AND THAT'S ANOTHER
FACTOR TO CONSIDER.
AND THEN FINALLY THE SO AFTER
LOOKING AT ALL THESE THINGS,
WE'LL WORK WITH THE WHOLE CITY
TEAM TO ASSESS THE RISKS AND
BENEFITS OF RECONFIGURATION AND
DEVELOP A RECOMMENDED DESIGN.
YOU KNOW, WE MAY NOT FIND THAT
EVERY CORRIDOR IS A GOOD
CANDIDATE FOR RECONFIGURATION
BUT WE REALLY WANT TO TAKE A
CLOSE LOOK AND MAKE SURE WE'RE
CONSIDERING ALL THE BENEFITS.
>> I'VE GOT A QUICK QUESTION.
SURE.
ABOUT THE DATA COLLECTION.
SO YOU MENTIONED THAT IT'S
STARTING SOON AND I HAVE SEEN
SOME OF THE ADT STRIPS ON SOME
OF THESE CORRIDORS IN QUESTION
JUST IN THE LAST TWENTY FOUR
HOURS.
SO I ASSUME THAT THAT'S WHAT
THOSE ARE RELATED TO.
HOW LONG WILL YOU BE COLLECTING
THE VEHICLE DATA FOR AND ARE
YOU LOOKING AT SPEEDS AS WELL
AS VOLUMES?
>> YES, WE ARE GOING TO BE
GETTING WE'RE COLLECTING DATA
FOR A ONE WEEK PERIOD AND I
DON'T KNOW WHAT THE EXACT DATE
AND MIGHT NOT BE THE EXACT SAME
DATA ON EACH CORRIDOR YET BUT
WE HAVE A CONTRACTOR TO DO THE
COUNTS UNDERWAY.
THEY WILL BE SO THERE'LL BE
SEVEN DAYS FOR WE CAN WE DO
WANT TO AVOID A FOOTBALL.
WE CAN GET MORE OF A TYPICAL
WEEKEND WITHIN THAT SEVEN DAYS
AND IT WILL ALSO INCLUDE SPEED.
SO WE'LL HAVE SPEEDS AND
VOLUMES WE WILL NOT HAVE
MULTIMODAL USERS LIKE BIKE
VOLUMES AND WHATNOT ALTHOUGH WE
WILL BE COLLECTING THAT LATER
IN THE PROCESS.
I'M JUST CURIOUS IS THERE A
REASON ONLY SEVEN DAYS I MEAN
JUST FROM AN OUTSIDER
PERSPECTIVE IT SEEMS LIKE THE
STRIPS ARE OUT THERE JUST LET
THEM BE FOR A LONG TIME BUT
DOES IT TAKE A LOT OF EFFORT OR
SOMETHING TO COLLECT COLLEGE
TOWN THINGS ARE VERY UP AND
DOWN AS YOU MIGHT IMAGINE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WELL AND THAT WAS THAT'S WHY IT
WAS CONSIDERED WE WANTED TO
HAVE IT DEFINITELY OUT OF THE
UNIVERSITY IN SESSION BUT NOT
NECESSARILY A SUPER PEAK.
SO AND I THINK FOR EVENTS LIKE
SAY A FOOTBALL GAME OR OTHER
SPECIAL EVENTS, THE CONCERT
COMING UP THAT WE WANTED TO
AVOID WE DON'T NECESSARILY
DESIGN STREETS FOR THOSE
HIGHEST PEAK EVENTS THAT WE
WANTED TO DESIGN FOR A TYPICAL
EVENT.
THERE ARE TYPICAL CONDITIONS
AND THEN MANAGE THE EVENTS AND
THE COST OF HAVING YOU KNOW,
WE'D LOVE TO HAVE ALL THAT DATA
OF CONTINUOUS COUNTERS BUT IT
WOULD BE A VERY HIGH COST AND
THAT WOULD BE WELL IT WOULD
DELAY THE STUDY FOR A LONG
PERIOD TO COLLECT ALL THE DATA
SO A WEEK BECAUSE A VERY
TYPICAL AMOUNT AND THEN WE KNOW
WE COULD LOOK AT CONTINUOUS
COUNTERS TO SEE IF WE'VE HIT
SOME UNUSUAL CONDITIONS.
>> THANK YOU, LORD.
YEAH, I HAD A SIMILAR QUESTION.
JUST ONE OTHER POINT I'M
CURIOUS ABOUT.
MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT THE
CITY DOES HAVE SOME HEIDA
INSTALLED AT SPECIFIC LIGHTS.
FOR EXAMPLE, RECENTLY I KNOW
THERE WAS A NEW TRAFFIC CAMERA
INSTALLED AT THE INTERSECTION
OF STADIUM AND INDUSTRIAL AND
MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT LIGHT
CAN DETECT HAS THE POTENTIAL TO
DETECT MULTIMODAL.
IS THAT A FACTOR BEING
CONSIDERED AS WELL IN TERMS
OF DATA SOURCES FOR MEASURING
STREET?
>> YES.
SO WE WILL BE AND I'LL GET TO
THAT IN THE NEXT STAGE WHEN WE
GET INTO DESIGN WE WILL BE
DOING TO GET MULTIMODAL COUNTS
TO INCLUDE PEDESTRIANS AND
BIKES.
WE REALLY NEED TO USE CAMERA
DATA COLLECTORS AND SO THAT'S
PROBABLY WHAT YOU'RE WHAT YOU
HAVE INSTALLED.
MANY CITIES ARE INSTALLING
CAMERAS AS THEY UPGRADE SIGNAL
EQUIPMENT OR YOU KNOW AND SO
THAT'S THE KIND OF THING THAT
WE WOULD BE USING TO COLLECT
THE DETAILED WHAT WE CALL A
TURNING MOVEMENT AT THE
INTERSECTION AND WHAT WILL BE
WE'LL BE DOING THAT KIND
OF LATER AS WE FOCUS IN ON THE
MOST CHALLENGING LOCATIONS AND
ESPECIALLY WHERE WE HAVE TWO
OF THESE CORRIDORS COMING
TOGETHER.
WE'LL GET THOSE MULTI-MODAL
COUNTS.
BUT FOR THE AMOUNT OF PLACES
THAT WE NEED AT THIS POINT
DOING WHAT WE CALL THE YARRA
TWO COUNTS WAS WHAT WE THINK IS
SUFFICIENT FOR NOW AND WILL GET
US FURTHER DOWN THE STUDY.
>> OK, THANK YOU FOR CLARIFYING
DOUBLE.
>> THANKS SO MUCH FOR GOING
OVER THIS.
I LOVE THE NEW APPROACH SEEMS
MUCH MORE ALIGNED WITH OUR
TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND WHERE
WE'RE AT IN THE INTENTION
BEHIND THE RESOLUTION THAT
INSPIRED THIS.
I'M VERY INTERESTED TO SEE THE
SPEED DATA OF COURSE BECAUSE
WELL JUST LAST WEEK I SAW ON
THE ENDEAVOR POLICE FACEBOOK
THAT SOMEONE WAS PULLED OVER
FOR GOING FIVE MILES OVER THE
SPEED LIMIT OF A FREEWAY ON
PLYMOUTH ROAD.
SO SEVENTY FIVE AND A THIRTY
FIVE MILE AN HOUR ZONE
OF THE
QUESTION THAT I WAS GOING TO
ASK WAS NO I DON'T REMEMBER BUT
I WOULD HOPE THAT THE SPEED
DATA COULD BE SHARED
TRANSPARENTLY AND AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE.
I JUST THINK IT WOULD BE USEFUL
AND INTERESTING TO SEE.
YEAH I THINK THAT'S IT YEAH I'M
SURE THAT CAN BE OH I DON'T
RANGEELA HOW ARE YOU
INTERFACING WITH THE RIDE
BECAUSE THEY HAVE 20 40
PLANNED.
I KNOW THAT THEY HAVE DESIGNS
ON HAVING BUS PRIORITY LANES SO
I TRUST THAT YOU'RE WORKING
CLOSELY WITH THEM TOO.
>> OH YEAH ABSOLUTELY AND THAT
WILL BE A BIG FACTOR IN WHEN WE
LOOK AT WHAT IS THE FUTURE
CROSS SECTION THERE'S SOME
CORRIDORS THAT HAVE BRT
SCHERVISH PROPOSED SO WE WOULD
LOOK AT THOSE CORRIDORS SHOULD
HAVE A BUSTLING PROVIDED WHERE
POSSIBLE WHERE THE DIMENSIONS
ALLOW SO AND THEN ALSO STOPS
WHEN WE GET THEM SOME MORE THE
DESIGN TO ENSURE WE'RE GETTING
THE BUS STOPS AND TRANSFER
POINTS WORK FOR THEM.
>> SO AWESOME.
THANKS THANKS FOR THAT QUESTION
TIME.
I WAS ALSO GOING TO ASK ABOUT
SHARING THE SPEED DATA SO I'M
ALSO INTERESTED IN THAT.
I ALSO HAVE A QUESTION ABOUT
WHEN WE'RE PROPOSING A NEW
DESIGN FOR A RECONFIGURED
STREET LIKE HOW DO WE CHOOSE
WHAT OUR TARGET SPEED IS FOR
THAT PIECE OF ROAD?
LIKE HOW DO WE ARE WE GOING TO
TRY AND DESIGN IT SO THAT IT IS
SO THE TRAFFIC IS SLOWER AND
YOU KNOW, TO HELP MITIGATE ANY
CRASHES THAT DO HAPPEN.
>> UM, HOW DO WE HOW ARE WE
CHOOSING THAT?
WELL, WE ARE TALKING ABOUT
SPEED AND A BIT THAT THAT'S
DEFINITELY A GOAL FOR VISION
ZERO FOR THE PLANET THAT CITIES
PLANS TO MAKE THE STREETS
SAFER.
REALLY A LOT OF IT BOILS DOWN
TO SPEED AND YOU KNOW, SO WE'LL
UNDERSTAND THE EXISTING SPEED
AND THEN HAVE SOME IDEA OF HOW
IT MIGHT CHANGE WITH DIFFERENT
ROADWAY RECONFIGURATION
CHANGES.
I GUESS I WOULD LIKE TO
ENCOURAGE THAT WE TAKE THESE
RECONFIGURED THESE
RECONFIGURATIONS OPPORTUNITIES
TO LOWER SPEED TO BE IN LINE
WITH OUR VISION ZERO GOALS AND
THEN YEAH, I THINK THAT'S
TOTALLY AND WHAT I'LL SHOW IN A
FEW SLIDES SO I THINK REINFORCE
THAT SO MORE TO COME.
>> WELL SORRY TO GET AHEAD
OF IT.
I WAS LIKE RACHEL YEAH.
LUCY I WAS WONDERING IF YOU
COULD SAY A LITTLE BIT MORE
ABOUT YOU MENTIONED AND MAYBE
YOU'RE GETTING THIS THAT THE
SORT OF PERSON THROUGHPUT AND
IN PARTICULAR COLLECTING DATA
ON NON CAR USES OF THESE
SEGMENTS.
YEAH.
HUMMING SO MAYBE I SHOULD OH
I'M SORRY.
YES.
YES WE'RE ONLY PARTWAY THROUGH.
YEAH I THINK THERE'LL BE MORE
AND THEN HAPPY TO ANSWER MORE
QUESTIONS SO.
>> ALL RIGHT WELL I'M GOING TO
KEEP GOING THROUGH AND THANKS
FOR THE QUESTIONS.
I APPRECIATE UM THIS IS A QUOTE
FROM THE REPORT THAT WE YOU
KNOW I THINK IS GUIDING OUR
APPROACH.
SO I JUST ADDED IT'S THE MOST
IMPORTANT THING IS NOT TO
CHANGE PEOPLE'S MINDS BUT TO BE
HONEST ABOUT THE CHOICES ON THE
TABLE AND DESCRIBE THEM FAIRLY
.
SO THIS MITIGATION PROCESS
AGAIN THESE ARE FOR THE
CORRIDORS IT MIGHT NOT BE YOU
KNOW, IN THE PAST SORT OF IT'S
EASY CANDIDATES FOR ROAD
RECONFIGURATION BUT STILL MIGHT
HAVE ENOUGH BENEFITS AND YOU
KNOW, THEY STILL DESERVE A
CLOSE SO AND ANOTHER THING THAT
WILL BE KIND OF BAKED INTO OUR
METHOD I'M SHOWING A SLIDE THAT
SHOWS THE MYRIAD OF DIFFERENT
WAYS THAT PEOPLE ADAPT TO
CHANGES IN RODWAY CAPACITY AND
WE SEE THIS TREND YOU KNOW,
CITIES WHEN THEY TAKE FREEWAY
DOWN OR DO ROAD
RECONFIGURATIONS AND JUST READ
THROUGH THE DIFFERENT WAYS.
BUT THERE ARE ALL THINGS TO BE
CONSIDERED.
ONE IS JUST CHANGING A ROUTE.
SOME PEOPLE MIGHT TAKE A
DIFFERENT ROUTE THAN THEY WOULD
ONCE SET ROAD CAPACITIES
CHANGED.
PEOPLE MIGHT TRAVEL AT
DIFFERENT TIME OF DAY AND AVOID
THE PEAK HOUR BECAUSE A LOT
OF TRIPS ARE MORE FLEXIBLE
ABOUT WHEN PEOPLE GO.
PEOPLE MIGHT MAKE A PROXIMITY
SHIFT.
THEY MIGHT CHOOSE A STORE
CLOSER TO HOME THAN ONE FURTHER
ACROSS TOWN OR ONE THAT AVOIDS,
YOU KNOW, WHAT THEY VIEW AS
CONGESTION MODE.
CHANGE IS CLEARLY A BIG GOAL.
PEOPLE MIGHT DECIDE NOT TO
DRIVE OR TO RIDE THEIR BIKE OR
TAKE THE BUS OR TAKE ANOTHER
WAY TO GO MAKE THEIR TRIP TRIP
LENGTH CHANGE.
PEOPLE MIGHT REDUCE TRIP
LENGTHS AND ADAPT IN THAT WAY
SUBSTITUTION THIS WOULD BE LIKE
WORKING ONLINE, WORKING
REMOTELY OR DOING MORE THINGS
VIRTUALLY RATHER THAN MAKING A
PHYSICAL TRIP TRIP TRAINING
PLANNING YOUR TRIPS TO BE MORE
EFFICIENT WHERE YOU AVOID
MAKING AS MANY TRIPS OUT
OF YOUR HOUSE OR JUST TRIP
ELIMINATION MAYBE DECIDING YOU
DON'T NEED TO MAKE A TRIP ON A
DAY AND THESE DIFFERENT WAYS
PEOPLE ADAPT ALL CAN ADD UP TO
REDUCE TRAFFIC AND THE PEAK
HOUR WHEN YOU KNOW THE CAPACITY
WE PROVIDE KIND OF ENCOURAGES
TYPES OF BEHAVIOR.
SO WHEN IT CHANGES THESE ARE
DIFFERENT THE CHANGES THAT WE
OFTEN SHOW AS I SAID, OUR
INITIAL WAVE OF TRAFFIC COUNTS
IS NOT GOING TO BE MULTIMODE.
THAT'S PARTLY JUST THE
TECHNOLOGY AND THE YOU KNOW,
COVERING AS MANY CORRIDORS.
THERE REALLY AREN'T GOOD
OPTIONS BUT WE DO HAVE SOME
GOOD DATA THAT WE'LL BE USING
AGAIN TO BRING INTO THAT
ANALYSIS.
THIS IS THE OUTPUT OF WHAT WE
CALL REPLICATE DATA REPLICA IS
A BIG DATA SOURCE WHERE WE HAVE
AND THESE ARE GOING TO THEIR
ESTIMATES ARE NOT ABSOLUTE
MEASUREMENTS BUT THEY'RE BASED
ON AN AGGREGATION OF A LOT
OF DATA.
THIS IS THE DATA FOR THAT ONE
SECTION OF PACARD STREET THAT
SHOWS US THE EXISTING MODE
SHARE OF DIFFERENT WAYS THAT
PEOPLE ARE TRAVELING ON THE
ROAD.
SO AS YOU CAN SEE SEVENTY EIGHT
PERCENT OF ALL THE PERSON TRIPS
ARE BY DRIVING A PRIVATE AUTO
ANOTHER 13 PERCENT OF THOSE PER
PERSON TRIPS ARE BEING AN AUTO
PASSENGER.
THAT MEANS YOU KNOW, THAT'S
ACTUALLY A VERY IN THIS CASE A
HIGH PERCENTAGE OF SINGLE
OCCUPANCY VEHICLES.
THERE'S SOME COMMERCIAL
TRAFFIC.
THERE'S A SMALL TWO PERCENT OR
BIKING DOWN ABOUT ONE PERCENT
OR WALKING LESS THAN ONE
PERCENT USING PUBLIC TRANSIT.
SO AGAIN AND AGAIN THESE ARE
THESE ARE ESTIMATES BASED ON
AGGREGATED BIG DATA BUT THEY
GIVE US SOME STARTING POINT AND
WE WILL SEE DIFFERENT PATTERNS
ON THE DIFFERENT CORRIDORS.
BUT WE'LL USE THIS TO
UNDERSTAND THE EXISTING
CONDITIONS BUT WILL ALSO IT TO
UNDERSTAND WHAT ARE THE
POTENTIAL FOR ROAD SHIFT.
YOU KNOW, WHERE ARE THE PEOPLE
GOING WHERE WHAT ARE THEY DOING
NOW?
WHAT MIGHT THEY DO IN A
DIFFERENT ENVIRONMENT?
>> SO I'M SHOWING A SLIDE HERE
WHEN EVEN THOUGH THERE WEREN'T
A LOT OF BIKING TRIPS BUT THERE
WERE SOME AND SO THIS CHART ON
THE LEFT SHOWS US THE AVERAGE
TRIP LENGTH FOR BIKING TRIPS
USING REPLICA DATA ON PAPPERT
STREET AND WHAT YOU CAN SEE IS
THE MAJORITY OF THE BIKING
TRIPS ARE OF LENGTH BETWEEN
FOUR AND EIGHT MILES AND THAT'S
THAT'S KIND OF TYPICAL.
IT'S A GOOD BIKING DISTANCE.
THERE ARE ACTUALLY QUITE A FEW
BIKING TRIPS OR EVEN LONGER
WHICH IS KIND OF A LITTLE MORE
UNUSUAL.
SO I THINK THERE'S A LOT ACTIVE
RIDERS FROM ANN ARBOR THAT ARE
NOT AFRAID TO TAKE LONG
DISTANCES.
A LOT OF RIDERS IN THE TWO TO
FOUR MILE RANGE.
AND SO WHEN WE LOOK AT THE AUTO
A CHART ON THE RIGHT SHOWS THE
LENGTH OF AUTO TRIPS AND WHAT
YOU CAN SEE IS ON PAPPERT
STREET THERE ARE A LOT OF THOSE
SHORT TRIPS SO THE MOST COMMON
LENGTH OF AN AUTO TRIP
UNPACKAGED IS ALSO BETWEEN FOUR
AND EIGHT MILES AND THAT'S
REALLY ONE A TRIP LENGTH THAT
HAS POTENTIAL FOR BIKING
FURTHER THAT SHORTER TRIPS ARE
EVEN GREATER POTENTIAL FOR BIKE
LENGTH TRIPS.
SO WHAT WE'LL DO THIS KIND
OF ANALYSIS TO UNDERSTAND WHAT
ARE THE MODAL PATTERNS NOW?
WHERE ARE THEIR OPPORTUNITIES
OR MAYBE SOME LOW HANGING FRUIT
FOR CHANGING MODE SHIFT IF WE
CHANGE THE INFRASTRUCTURE AND
PROVIDE IT OPPORTUNITIES.
>> SO ANOTHER THING WE TALKED
ABOUT SPEED DATA.
THIS IS AGAIN THIS IS DATA THAT
WAS COLLECTED QUITE A FEW YEARS
AGO ON PACKARD STREET, THE SAME
AREA AND JUST A SNAPSHOT OF THE
DATA.
BUT WHAT WE CAN SEE IS WHERE
THERE'S A POSTED SPEED LIMIT ON
THE STREET OF 35 MILES AN HOUR.
THE 85 PERCENTILE SPEED WAS 47
MILES PER HOUR.
AGAIN THIS IS OLD DATA SHOW
WILL BE COLLECTING NEW DATA.
GOT A GOOD CLOSE LOOK.
THE AVERAGE SPEED WAS FORTY ONE
MILES PER HOUR AND THEN WE LIKE
TO LOOK AT WHAT ARE THE WHAT
HOW MUCH WHAT ARE THE SPEEDS IN
RELATION TO WHAT LET'S SAFER
OUTCOMES.
>> SO THERE'S A CHART ON THE
RIGHT THAT'S SHOWING WHAT ARE
THE CONSEQUENCES OF A VEHICLE
TRAVELING AT 20 30 AND 40 MILES
AN HOUR.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT THOSE
SPEED REALLY AFFECTS IS THE
DRIVERS FIELD OF VISION AT
TWENTY MILES AN HOUR A DRIVER
REALLY HAS A BROAD VIEW OF THE
ROAD BECAUSE THERE'S NOT AS
MUCH MOVEMENT ON THEIR
PERIPHERAL VISION.
THEY'RE MUCH MORE LIKELY TO BE
ABLE TO SEE A PERSON TRYING TO
CROSS OR A PERSON RIDING ALONG
THEIR BIKE ALONG THE EDGE
OF THE STREET AND AVOID A
CONFLICT IF SOMETHING HAPPENS
AT 30 MILES AN HOUR THAT FIELD
NARROWED AND AT FORTY MILES AN
HOUR IT'S QUITE NARROW.
AND SO IN THIS CASE ON PACKARD
STREET WE'RE SEEING A LOT
OF TRAFFIC AVERAGE BEING FORTY
ONE MILES AN HOUR.
THAT WOULD BE A CLEAR SIGN THAT
REDUCTION SPEED WOULD BE
IMPORTANT.
I WAS STOPPING DISTANCE SORRY.
THAT'S ALL I HAD REDUNDANT
WHENEVER YOU HAVE AN
OPPORTUNITY KATE'S GOT A
QUESTION.
I'M PLEASED.
GO AHEAD.
OH THANK YOU.
I ACTUALLY IT WAS ON THE LAST
SLIDE.
IT'S GREAT THE METHODOLOGY SORT
OF TAKES INTO ACCOUNT THE THE
FACT THAT MODE SHIFTING WILL
OCCUR IF THE INFRASTRUCTURE IS
DIFFERENT.
I JUST.
COULD YOU EXPLAIN MORE OF THAT
DATA ON THE LEFT SIDE OF THE
SLIDE WHERE YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT THAT?
WHERE IS THIS?
IT'S JUST LIKE TRIP DISTANCE
LIKE AND I APOLOGIZE IF YOU CAN
HEAR MY FAMILY SHOUTING AT THE
BASEBALL GAME IN THE BACKGROUND
IS THIS LIKE ON THIS PARTICULAR
SEGMENT FOR PEOPLE LIKE OR I'M
SO HOW DO YOU THEN I UNDERSTAND
A LITTLE BIT OF THE TRANSLATION
BUT I I GUESS I'M UNSURE HOW
YOU TAKE THE NEGATIVE FROM THE
BAD INFRASTRUCTURE AND THAT TO
PROJECT THE MOST OF YOU JUST
EXPLAIN THAT A LITTLE MORE.
>> IT SOUNDS LIKE YOU'RE DOING
IT.
I'M JUST NOT SURE HOW WELL WE
OFTEN LOOK AT YOU KNOW, THE
TRIP LENGTH FOR THE AUTO TRIPS
AS AN INDICATOR OF WHAT IS
THERE POTENTIAL FOR MORE BIKE
TRIPS AND IN THIS CASE WE'RE
LOOKING AT ON THE LEFT SIDE HOW
ARE PEOPLE CURRENTLY BIKING ON
THIS ROAD?
AND YOU'RE RIGHT, IT'S NOT WITH
GOOD INFRASTRUCTURE.
SO WE WE'D HOPE TO SEE A LOT
MORE PEOPLE RIDING MAYBE A LOT
OF ALL DIFFERENT POINTS AND
IT'S REALLY ON THE RIGHT SIDE
IS PROBABLY THE MORE CRITICAL
PART IS WHAT WE WANT TO
UNDERSTAND IN THIS CORRIDOR
THERE ARE A LOT OF SHORTER
TRIPS THAT ARE POTENTIAL BIKE
LENGTH TRIPS AND THAT THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT WE CAN WITH
PROVIDING INFRASTRUCTURE WE'D
EXPECT TO DRAW SOME OF THE DRAW
SOME OF THOSE TRIPS OVER TO
BIKE
.
>> OK, THAT MAKES SENSE.
SO IT'S MORE IT'S KIND OF LIKE
THE RIGHT THE LEFT SIDE INFORMS
A LITTLE BIT WHERE YOU THINK
THE MODE SHIFT IS GOING TO
HAPPEN BUT THERE'S MORE FACTORS
THAT GO INTO LIKE WHICH
OF THESE CAR TRIPS MIGHT BECOME
RIGHT.
YEAH AND WE CAN GET A LOT MORE
I DIDN'T GET INTO THE FULL
DETAIL BUT WE HAVE THINGS LIKE
PURPOSE AND WE CAN ALSO LOOK AT
ORIGINS AND DESTINATIONS SO
THERE MAY BE, YOU KNOW, A
NUMBER OF DIFFERENT THINGS WE
LOOK AT OF YOU KNOW, IF WE HAD
THE SPIKE NETWORK WOULD IT HOW
MANY TRIPS COULD POTENTIALLY WE
SERVE?
AND AGAIN WE'RE LOOKING MORE AT
POTENTIAL FOR ROAD SHIFT.
>> WE'RE NOT NECESSARILY GOING
TO CALCULATE AN EXACT
PREDICTION BUT YOU KNOW, IF WE
SEE IT'S JUST A CORRIDOR THAT
THINGS COULD CHANGE WITH
CHANGING INFRASTRUCTURE.
THANK YOU.
THAT'S SUPER HELPFUL.
SO SPEED AND SAFETY I KNOW
THAT'S ALSO CAME UP SO I'M JUST
WORKING THROUGH THAT GRAPHIC ON
THE RIGHT WITH WE HAVE THE
DIFFERENT CHARACTERISTICS
OF DIFFERENT SPEEDS STOPPING
DISTANCE IS REALLY DIFFERENT.
IT REALLY GETS A LONGER
EXPONENTIALLY WITH HIGH SPEEDS
AT TWENTY MILES AN HOUR A
DRIVER STOP AT FORTY FEET ON
AVERAGE THIRTY MILES AN HOUR
THEY CAN STOP WITHIN 90 FEET AT
FORTY MILES AN HOUR IT GOES ALL
THE WAY UP TO ONE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY FIVE FEET AND THERE'S
JUST DRIVER SLAMMING ON THE
BRAKES.
BUT THE MOST IMPORTANT THING IS
THAT THE LIKELIHOOD OF A
FATALITY OR SEVERE INJURY ALSO
REALLY CHANGES AT THESE SPEEDS
.
SO AND THAT'S JUST BASED ON THE
IMPACT AND POTENTIAL FOR
INJURY.
>> SO AT TWENTY MILES AN HOUR
WE HAVE THIRTEEN PERCENT
LIKELIHOOD OF A FATALITY OR
SERIOUS INJURY AT THIRTY MILES
AN HOUR THAT GOES UP TO 40
PERCENT AND AT 40 MILES AN HOUR
UP TO 73 PERCENT.
SO THE MAJORITY OF CRASHES AND
IF WE GO BACK TO THE CHART ON
THE LEFT SIDE WE DID LOOK AT
HOW MANY PEOPLE WERE IN BUCKETS
OF SPEED AND SO WHAT WE FOUND
IS ONLY ONE PERCENT OF THE
DRIVERS WERE IN THAT 20 MILE AN
HOUR RANGE BETWEEN 20 AND 30
MILES AN HOUR THAT AND THEN
THIRTY TWO PERCENT IN DRIVING
AT THIRTY ONE TO FORTY AND
SIXTY SIX PERCENT OF THE
DRIVERS WERE GOING OVER FORTY
MILES AN HOUR.
>> SO THIS CORRIDOR THERE'S
CLEARLY A LOT OF SPEEDING
PROBLEM THAT CREATING A SAFETY
PROBLEM AND LIKELY ONE OF THE
REASONS WHY IT'S ON THE HIGH
INJURY NETWORK AND WE WOULD
DEFINITELY LOOK AT THAT BEING A
PRIORITY HOW WE CAN ADDRESS THE
SPEEDS ON THIS QUARTER.
ANOTHER IMPORTANT SAFETY ISSUE
TO LOOK AT IS THE PRESENCE
OF WHAT WE CALL A MULTIPLE
THREAT CROSSING.
SO ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE
IMAGE OF THE SLIDE IS A MAP
SHOWING ALL THE CORRIDORS.
WE HAVE AN ORANGE LINES AND
THEN THE GREEN DOTS ARE ALL
PLACES WHERE WE HAVE CROSSINGS
THAT ARE NOT OUT OF REGULAR
TRAFFIC SIGNAL BUT RATHER HAVE
AN RFP BUT WHEN EVEN AN RFP
THEY'RE THEY'RE GREAT.
WE OF COURSE RECOMMEND THEM A
LOT.
THERE'S A LOT IN ANN ARBOR AND
THAT'S A GREAT THING.
BUT THERE'S STILL WHEN YOU HAVE
THE COMBINATION OF HIGH SPEEDS
AND YOU HAVE THE LACK
OF VISIBILITY WHERE ONE CAR
STOPPING A PERSON STARTING TO
CROSS AND THE ONCOMING CAR IN
THE OTHER LANE DOESN'T SEE THE
PEDESTRIAN WHICH ARE BLOCKED
FROM VIEW IS STILL A PLACE
WHERE CRASHES CAN HAPPEN.
AND SO THE REALLY THE ONLY WAY
TO COMPLETELY ELIMINATE THAT IS
BY HAVING JUST ONE LANE TO
CROSS THE TIME SO THAT THERE'S
NO YOU KNOW, SOMEONE CAN CROSS
ONE LANE WAIT AND THEN CROSS
THE OTHER LINE.
SO THIS IS A KIND OF SAFETY
ISSUE THAT YOU KNOW, IS
PROBABLY MORE PREVALENT IN SOME
QUARTERS THAN THE OTHERS WOULD
BE SHOULD BE CONSIDERED AND A
RECONFIGURATION ANALYSIS AND
THEN ANOTHER ELEMENT WOULD BE
WHAT WE'RE CALLING THE PERSON
CAPACITY OR PERSON THROUGHPUT
CAPACITY OF BOTH THE EXISTING
CONDITIONS AND THE PROPOSED
FUTURE CONDITIONS AND HELP
THINK ABOUT WHAT'S THE RIGHT
WHAT'S RIGHT FOR ROUND ANN
ARBOR, WHAT'S RIGHT FOR THIS
CORRIDOR.
AND AGAIN GOING BACK TO OUR
EXAMPLE OF PACKARD STREET, THE
EXISTING CONDITION IS TWO LANES
IN EACH DIRECTION WITH BIKE
LANES AND CENTER TURN LANE AND
A PROPOSED CONDITION JUST
HYPOTHETICAL AT THIS POINT
WOULD BE ONE LANE IN EACH
DIRECTION LEFT TURN LANES AND
MUCH WIDER BIKE LANES THAT ARE
SEPARATED FROM TRAFFIC.
AND THEN THERE'S A TABLE ON THE
LEFT SIDE THAT SHOWS WHAT IS
THE PERSON THROUGHPUT CAPACITY
FOR BOTH THE EXISTING AND THE
PROPOSED THREE LANES.
SO THE SIDEWALK ACTUALLY HAS
QUITE A BIT OF CAPACITY FOR
MOVING PEOPLE.
OBVIOUSLY WE'RE NOT ALWAYS
USING THAT BUT IT'S NOT
CHANGING.
IT'S TWELVE HUNDRED AND SIXTY
PEOPLE PER HOUR.
THE BICYCLE CAPACITY OF THE
EXISTING CONDITIONS JUST FIVE
FOOT BIKE LANES IS 740 PER
HOUR.
WE'RE A WIDE OR SEPARATED BIKE
LANES WHERE PEOPLE CAN PASS TO
RIDE SIDE BY SIDE.
THE BIKE CAPACITY GOES UP TO
NINETEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY
PEOPLE PER HOUR TRANSIT
CAPACITY IN THIS CASE IT'S NOT
CHANGING.
WE'RE NOT RECOMMENDING, YOU
KNOW, ANY CHANGES TO SERVICE OR
BUS LANES.
SO THEY'RE BOTH 240 PER HOUR
AND THAT'S BASED ON THE NUMBER
OF BUSSES PER HOUR ON AVERAGE
AND HOW FULL THEY ARE AND THEN
THE VEHICULAR CAPACITY
OF COURSE WILL CHANGE EXISTING
CONDITIONS FOUR THOUSAND TWO
HUNDRED AND TWENTY VEHICLES PER
HOUR AND THE PROPOSED
RECONFIGURATION IT GOES DOWN TO
TWENTY FIVE HUNDRED THIRTY
VEHICLES PER HOUR.
SO JUST LOOKING OUT THERE IS AN
OVERALL REDUCTION IN THIS SORT
OF PERSON THROUGHPUT CAPACITY.
BUT THIS JUST GIVES US AN IDEA
OF WHAT WHAT WOULD BE THE RIGHT
DESIGN AND YOU KNOW, ARE WE
PROVIDING SUFFICIENT MOBILITY
AND YOU KNOW IN A WAY THAT
MEETS THE VISION FOR THE CITY.
SO AT THE END OF SORRY.
>> GO AHEAD.
OH YEAH.
THANKS LUCY.
THAT'S REALLY CLEAR.
I I HAVE A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS
ABOUT HOW YOU CALCULATE THE
INCREASED BIKE THROUGHPUT LIKE
CYCLIST THROUGHPUT CAPACITY
JUST WITH WIDENING THE LANE AND
THEN ALSO IN TERMS OF THE
TRANSIT CAPACITY LIKE WHY IS IT
THAT THE METHODOLOGY IS ONLY
BASED ON EXISTING A HOW FULL
THE BUSSES ARE IN THE CURRENT
CONDITION IF THE EXPECTATION OR
LIKE THE THEORY IS THAT PEOPLE
WILL INCLUDE MODE SHIFT IN THE
NEW CONDITION?
>> WELL THOSE ARE GOOD
QUESTIONS AND THE BICYCLE
CAPACITY IS BASED ON RESEARCH
AND WE'RE DRAWING THIS RIGHT
FROM NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION
RESEARCH DATA SOURCES.
>> BUT THE IDEA IS IF YOU HAVE
A LOT OF RIDERS AND PEOPLE
WOULD BE SIDE BY SIDE, THEY
COULD PASS A SLOW RIDER.
THEY'D BE YOU CAN JUST ADD A
LOT MORE PEOPLE THROUGH ON THE
WIDER BIKE LANES AND AGAIN
THAT'S BASED ON RESEARCH.
I'M TRANCED I THINK YOU HAVE A
VERY FAIR POINT THAT IN THIS
CASE AND AGAIN THIS IS OUR
HYPOTHETICAL EXAMPLE WE DIDN'T
PROJECT ANY BIG CHANGES TO
TRANSIT SERVICE THAT MIGHT LEAD
TO MORE RIDERSHIP BASED ON THE
CITY'S PLAN.
THIS IS NOT PROPOSED AS A MAJOR
TRANSIT CORRIDOR.
I THINK IN SOME OF THE
CORRIDORS WHERE THERE'S A BRT
SERVICE PROJECTED WE WOULD BE
WORKING WITH THE RIDE TO LOOK
AT WHAT WOULD THE CAPACITY BE,
WOULD THERE BE MORE FREQUENCY?
WOULD THEY BE FULLER BUSSES SO
WE WOULD DEFINITELY BE LOOKING
AT TRANSIT ON THE CORRIDORS,
THE APPROPRIATE CORRIDORS THAT
YEAH, THAT MAKES SENSE AND I
THINK THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN
WHETHER OR NOT THERE'S A
PLANNED BRT ROUTE LIKE ON THE
CORRIDOR SEEMS CERTAINLY
RELEVANT I THINK WHEN WE'RE
CALLING IT CAPACITY TO ME THAT
MEANS LIKE WHAT'S POSSIBLE
BECAUSE I MEAN THERE AREN'T
NECESSARILY I DON'T WE'RE
SAYING THAT THERE ARE SEVEN
HUNDRED AND FORTY CYCLISTS NOW
AND THEN LIKE THE NINETEEN
SEVENTY IS WHAT'S POSSIBLE.
SO WITH TRANSIT I WOULD THINK
AT LEAST WE WOULD SAY WHAT IF
THE BUSSES WERE FULL AND
ACTUALLY NO I THINK THIS IS
ACTUALLY WITH THE BUSSES FOR OK
AND SO IT'S LIKE I THINK PEOPLE
FOR BUS STATION AND YOU KNOW
THERE'S SO MANY BUSSES PER HOUR
SO OK AND SO IT'S LIKE FOR FOR
THE ROADWAY YOU KNOW WE'RE NOT
DESIGNING A TRANSIT SERVICE BUT
I THINK YOU SHOULD KNOW THAT
THERE'S A BRT WITH BIGGER
VEHICLES.
YOU KNOW, WE COULD YOU WOULD
INCLUDE THAT.
YEAH THAT'S OK.
YEAH BUT THIS YEAR IT'S MORE
WHAT'S POSSIBLE.
IT'S NOT IT'S YOU KNOW ONE
PIECE OF THE STORY SO THAT HI
LUCY MY NAME IS MATT CARPENTER.
I'M A CEO OVER AT THE TRANSIT
AUTHORITY.
THE RIDE PERHAPS YOU'VE BEEN
SPEAKING WITH MY COLLEAGUES BUT
YOU AND I HAVEN'T YET 60 PEOPLE
ON A BUS IS INCREDIBLY CROWDED
BY THE WAY I HAD A METHOD, A
LOGICAL QUESTION AND I'M NOT
SURE THIS IS THE RIGHT TIME BUT
EVERYONE'S JUMPING IN AND
TRANSIT'S COME UP A COUPLE
OF TIMES.
SO I HAD I HAD TO JUMP IN.
MY QUESTION IS HOW IS THE STUDY
AND HOW IS THE STUDY GOING TO
TAKE INTO ACCOUNT THE
CUMULATIVE EFFECT OF SLOWING
TRAFFIC ON BUS OPERATIONS?
AND WHAT I MEAN IS I APPRECIATE
A MITIGATION POINT ABOUT BUS
LANES IN CERTAIN PLACES BUT
MOST OF OUR BUSSES OPERATE IN
MIXED TRAFFIC AND AS THE
TRAFFIC SLOWS DOWN, THE BUSSES
WILL SLOW DOWN THE SLOWER
TRAFFIC, SLOWER BUSSES, THE
LESS ATTRACTIVE SERVICE
THAT
STARTS TO RUN COUNTER TO SOME
POLICY OBJECTIVES LIKE WE'VE
HEARD EARLIER, IT HAS A
DISPROPORTION IMPACT ON CERTAIN
EQUITY POPULATIONS AND FRANKLY
IT HAS AN IMPACT ON OUR BUDGET.
YOUR NUMBERS HERE IN THIS TABLE
ARE INTERESTING TO FORTY SEEMS
LIKE NOT THE SEATING CAPACITY
OF THE BUS PERHAPS IT'S TODAY
BUT IF THE TRAFFIC IS MOVING
SLOWER EITHER WE'RE PUTTING
FEWER BUSSES THROUGH AND THE
TRANSIT RIDERSHIP CAPACITY IS
THEREFORE DROPPED OR I HAVE TO
BUY ANOTHER BUS AND PUT IT IN
THERE TO KEEP THE CAPACITY AT
THE SAME LEVEL WHICH MEANS SAME
NUMBER OF PEOPLE BUT AT A
HIGHER COST AND WE'VE KIND
OF BEEN STUCK HANDLING THIS
WITH THE CITY IN INDIVIDUAL
CORRIDORS FOR SEVERAL YEARS NOW
BUT IT'S STARTING TO BECOME
ACCUMULATIVELY NOTICEABLE ISSUE
.
>> SO MY QUESTION IS
METHODOLOGICALLY WITH THE STUDY
ARE BUSSES JUST GOING TO BE
TREATED LIKE ANY OTHER VEHICLE
AND IF THEY GET SLOWED DOWN TOO
BAD IT'S COLLATERAL DAMAGE OR
ARE BUSSES SOMEHOW ACKNOWLEDGE
OR BUS ROUTES SOMEHOW BEING
FACTORED INTO THE WORK TO TO TO
UNDERSTAND THAT THERE'S A THERE
NOT A REGULAR VEHICLE?
>> THERE'S SOMETHING DIFFERENT
GOING ON HERE.
THAT'S A GREAT QUESTION AND I'D
SAY THAT, YOU KNOW, THE TRANSIT
SYSTEM IS GOING TO BE REALLY
FRONT AND CENTER OF THINKING
ABOUT WHAT ARE THE RIGHT FUTURE
CROSS SECTION.
SO AND I THINK SOME OF THE
CORRIDORS WHERE THERE'S BRT
PLANS WE WOULD BE LOOKING AT
EXCLUSIVE BUS LANES JUST BEING
SOMETHING THAT WE'D WANT TO
CONSIDER.
I THINK THAT IT WOULD BE AND WE
HAVE AND AGAIN REVIEWED YOU
KNOW, WE HAVEN'T HAD A CHANCE
TO MEET AND DOWNLOAD DETAIL BUT
I THINK WE'D WANT TO KNOW WHERE
OUR TRANSIT DELAYS MOST
PREVALENT AND HAVE THAT
FACTORED INTO THIS AS WELL AND
THEN ARE THERE SOLUTIONS THAT
COULD BE A MITIGATION TO THAT
SLOWING DOWN TRANSPORT ROUTES
BY THINGS LIKE QUEUE JUMP LANES
OR YOU KNOW, THAT ALLOW TO GET
THE SAFETY BENEFIT IN ADDITION
TO NOT PENALIZING TRANSIT
BECAUSE YOUR POINTS ARE OUR
ABSOLUTE SPOT ON ABOUT THE
KINDS OF THINGS THAT HAVE TO BE
CONSIDERED SO AND A LOT OF THIS
IS AN EVALUATION OF TRADEOFFS
THAT YOU KNOW, WE'RE NOT GOING
TO BE CALCULATING A PASS OR
FAIL.
NO, BUT YOU KNOW, PRESENTING
THESE ARE ALL THE TRADE OFFS ON
ON THESE MORE CHALLENGING
CORRIDORS.
SO GOING INTO THIS DETAILED
LEVEL WILL BE SOMETHING THAT
WILL BE NOT DONE ACROSS ALL TEN
CORRIDORS BUT THE PLACES WHERE
WE SEE THE MOST, YOU KNOW,
POTENTIAL IMPACTS WHETHER IT'S
TRAFFIC OR TRANSIT.
>> SO THANK YOU.
>> WE LOOK FORWARD TO WORKING
WITH YES.
SAME HERE
.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WELL, I THINK THAT'S A GOOD
SEGWAY INTO AGAIN THIS
MITIGATION PROCESS WILL BE AT
THE END OF THE DAY WE WILL BE
LOOKING AT, YOU KNOW, WHAT IS
THE REALISTIC POTENTIAL AND
AGAIN, NOT ALL OF THE CORRIDORS
END UP HAVING A ROAD
RECONFIGURATION OR YOU KNOW,
THERE MIGHT BE AN OPTIMAL
CONFIGURATION THAT MAYBE
MAINTAINS MULTIPLE TRAVEL LANES
WHICH DIRECTION.
BUT WE WOULD BE LOOKING AT, YOU
KNOW, WHAT'S THE POTENTIAL
OF TRAFFIC REDUCTION DIVERTED
TO OTHER ROUTES DIVERTED TO
OTHER MODES AND CAN WE LIVE
WITH FEWER TRAFFIC LANES GIVEN
ALL THE OTHER BENEFITS THAT
WE'RE SEEING SO AND WHAT'S
REALISTIC FOR EACH CORRIDOR SO
THAT YOU KNOW, THERE'LL BE A
RECOMMENDATION OF A DESIGN FOR
EACH ROUTE BASED ON, YOU KNOW,
PARTLY QUANTITATIVE AND PARTLY
QUALITATIVE DEEP DOVE ON EACH
OF THESE CORRIDORS
.
>> SO FOLLOWING THAT WE WOULD
THEN ENTER INTO A CONCEPT
DESIGN PHASE FOR ALL THE
CORRIDORS AND AGAIN WE'RE NOT
GOING TO BE COMPLETELY
DESIGNING AND GREAT DETAIL BUT
I WANT TO GO THROUGH THE
PROCESS THAT WE WILL BE
FOLLOWING.
THE FIRST ONE IS AGAIN
COLLECTING MORE TRAFFIC OUT
OF IT IN THIS TIME TURNING
MOVEMENT COUNTS.
THESE ARE DONE WITH THE CAMERAS
AT THE INTERSECTION WHERE WE
GET ICICLES WALKING DIFFERENT
VEHICLE TYPES YOU KNOW, BUSSES,
TRUCKS ETC. AND WE'LL HAVE A
MUCH MORE DETAILED
UNDERSTANDING OF THE OPERATION
OF THE KEY INTERSECTIONS
BECAUSE THESE ARE THE POINTS
WHERE YOU REALLY HAVE THE
TRAFFIC CONGESTION AND THE, YOU
KNOW, POTENTIAL GRIDLOCK,
POTENTIAL TRANSIT DELAYS AND I
UNDERSTAND MORE DETAIL WHAT'S
HAPPENING AT EACH INTERSECTION.
WE'LL DO A SYNCRO ANALYSIS.
>> THIS IS A NO THIS IS A
TRAFFIC MODEL THAT TELLS US,
YOU KNOW, UNDERSTAND DIFFERENT
TYPES OF LANE CONFIGURATIONS
AND SIGNAL TIMING THAT HOW WITH
THE CAPACITY WILL BE HOW THE
INTERSECTION WILL FUNCTION.
WE'LL LOOK AT THINGS LIKE
TRAFFIC CALMING TREATMENTS.
ARE THERE WAYS TO REDUCE THE
SPEEDS FROM GETTING TO SAFETY
BENEFITS ASIDE FROM OR IN
ADDITION TO ROAD
RECONFIGURATION AND THEN WE'LL
DEVELOP CONCEPTUAL DESIGNS FOR
ALL THE RECONFIGURED CORRIDORS.
SO WHAT A CONCEPT DESIGN.
I JUST HAVE SOME EXAMPLES SHOWN
ON THIS PAGE.
THESE ARE TYPICAL DESIGN THAT
YOU KNOW THIS IS THE BEGINNING
OF A PROJECT DESIGN.
IT'S QUITE PRELIMINARY.
THEY TEND TO BE DONE ON AN
AERIAL PHOTO AND GIVE YOU NO
DIMENSIONS CROSS-SECTION WHICH
POINT OUT KEY ELEMENTS OF THE
DESIGN AND SHOW HOW IT LAYS OUT
ONTO THE EXISTING CONDITIONS.
I EXPECT OUR DESIGNS WILL
MOSTLY BE FITTING WITHIN THE
SAME CURB TO CURB WIDTH BECAUSE
BECAUSE OF THE COST
OF RECONFIGURING CURVES THIS
WILL MAKE THINGS MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT TO IMPLEMENT QUICKLY
AND A LOT OF CALL OUTS FROM
NOTES AND THINGS TO STILL NEED
TO BE RESOLVED BUT BASICALLY
CONVEY THE CONCEPT SO THAT THEN
IT COULD GO FURTHER THROUGH THE
DESIGN PROCESS AND THIS WILL BE
DONE.
WHAT WE EXPECT WILL BE KEY
INTERSECTIONS ON EACH OF THESE
CORRIDORS THAT REALLY DO NEED
TO BE FIGURED OUT AND THEN YOU
KNOW, THIS MIGHT MIGHT
HIGHLIGHT FURTHER FURTHER
CHANGES TO DESIGN.
MAYBE THERE'S A QUEUE JUMP LANE
OR THINGS LIKE THAT THAT COULD
BE BROUGHT INTO THE FOLD AT
THIS POINT SO THAT SET FOR OUR
METHODOLOGY CAN WE'LL GO BACK
AND ANSWER YOUR QUESTIONS BUT I
JUST WANT TO HIGHLIGHT OUR NEXT
STEPS.
WE ARE JUST STARTING TRAFFIC
DATA COLLECTION NOW WE'RE
COLLECTING FOR A ONE WEEK
PERIOD AND WE'LL GET DIRECTION
ON SPEED AND AGAIN WE'RE
GETTING IT DONE AS QUICKLY AS
WE CAN BY AVOIDING HOME GAMES
OR CONCERTS OR WHATNOT.
AND THEN THE OTHER PART OF THE
PROJECT THAT'S GETTING GEARED
UP IS ENGAGEMENT.
WE HAVE A WEBSITE THAT'S JUST
ADDING I THINK IT MIGHT BE
LAUNCHED NOW AND AN ONLINE
SURVEY WE'RE GOING TO HAVE POP
UP EVENTS INCLUDING THE GREEN
ANN ARBOR EVENT THIS WEEKEND
WE'LL BE DOING STAKEHOLDER
INTERVIEWS AND THEN THERE'S AN
OPEN HOUSE PLANNED FOR NOVEMBER
19TH AT THE ANN ARBOR DISTRICT
LIBRARY WHERE WE'LL PROVIDE A
LOT MORE INFORMATION ON STUDY.
AND AGAIN, THAT'S WHERE THE
INFORMATION GATHERING AND
LISTENING MODE SO WE WON'T HAVE
A LOT OF RESULTS TO SHARE AT
THAT POINT BUT WILL BE HELPING
INFORM THE STUDY SO AND THAT IS
IT FOR MY PRESENTATION.
MAYBE I'LL STOP SHARING FOR NOW
BUT I'M HAPPY TO GO BACK AND
PULL UP THE SLIDES IF THAT
WOULD BE HELPFUL IN ANSWERING
QUESTIONS.
>> SURE.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR THIS
PRESENTATION.
I KNOW THAT WE'LL SEE YOU AGAIN
IN THE NOT TOO DISTANT FUTURE.
SO IN LIGHT OF THAT, ARE THERE
ANY REMAINING QUESTIONS ERIC?
YEAH, IT WAS A VERY INFORMATIVE
PRESENTATION.
I REALLY APPRECIATE ONE THING
THAT STOOD OUT TO ME WITH THE
RECONFIGURATION DIAGRAMS WE
WERE VISITING PARIS PRETTY
RECENTLY LAST YEAR AND I
NOTICED A LOT OF THE TRANSIT
LANES THEY HAD WERE DUAL
PURPOSE RAPID TRANSIT AND BIKE
LANES.
SO A LOT OF THE DIAGRAMS YOU
SHOWED SEEMED LIKE THEY WOULD
BE WIDE ENOUGH TO FIT A BUS IN
THE BIKE LANE IF YOU NARROWED
THE BUFFER A LITTLE BIT AND
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT I'VE SEEN
OVERSEAS A FEW TIMES.
I DON'T KNOW IF IT'S SOMETHING
THAT'S JUST NOT DONE IN THE
UNITED STATES BUT IT SEEMS LIKE
IT COULD ADDRESS MAT'S CONCERNS
ABOUT, YOU KNOW, GETTING STUCK
IN TRAFFIC GIVEN THE BUSSES
ONLY COME EVERY 15 TO 30
MINUTES AND WE HAVE A LOT
OF BUS BIKE LANES AND BASTION
WHERE I DO A LOT OF WORK AND
THAT'S DEFINITELY SOMETHING
THAT IT'S NOT ALWAYS IDEAL FOR
THE BUS JUST WANT TO PROBABLY
GO FASTER THAN A TYPICAL BIKE
RIDER WHICH IS MAYBE MOVING AT
TWELVE MILES AN HOUR.
SO IT'S SOMETHING THAT YOU
KNOW, WE DO IT WHERE THAT'S THE
OPTIMAL SOLUTION AND AGAIN IT'S
BALANCING TRADE OFFS TRADE OFFS
AND CERTAINLY AT BUS MOVING AT
12 OR 15 MILES AN HOUR IS
BETTER THAN BEING STUCK IN
TRAFFIC BUT IT'S DEFINITELY
THAT WOULD BE IN THE MIX
SOMETHING TO CONSIDER
ANY OTHER
QUESTIONS?
NOT ONE TO THINK LUCY AGAIN.
>> OH YEAH.
LAUREN NOW I HAD ONE FINAL
QUESTION ESPECIALLY GIVEN THE
LAST SLIDE ON THE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES THAT
ARE COMING UP.
PERHAPS THIS IS A BETTER
QUESTION TO TREVOR.
SO I DO SEE THAT ENGAGE HUB
DOES HAVE THE
A TWO HOUR TWO
PROJECT AVAILABLE.
IT SAYS THAT TO BE DETERMINED
IT SOUNDED LIKE SOME OF THE
EVENTS MIGHT BE COMING UP
WITHIN THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER.
DO WE HAVE AN IDEA OF WHEN
THOSE NOTICES WILL BE SHARED
OUT TO ENCOURAGE RESIDENTS TO
PARTICIPATE?
>> WE'RE JUST GETTING THIS UP
AND STARTED.
I HAVE A NOTE FOR MYSELF TO
UPDATE THE ENGAGED PAGE WITH
THESE WITH SOME OF THE EVENTS
THAT WE'RE LISTED THERE SO THAT
THEY CAN BE MORE BROADLY KNOWN
AND WE WILL WE WILL BE WORKING
OUT THE BROADER PUBLICITY
OF AWARENESS OF THIS PROJECT.
AGAIN, THIS THIS IS THE START
OF IT.
WE'RE DEVELOPING A METHODOLOGY.
THIS WAS REALLY DETAILED.
THANK YOU ALL FOR LISTENING TO
THIS LEVEL OF DETAIL AT 8:00 AT
NIGHT.
SO WILL BUT WE WANTED TO GET
BROADER COMMUNITY AWARENESS
THESE ARE IN LINE WITH THE
CITY'S GOALS AND POLICIES AND
WE'RE GOING TO BE ESPECIALLY
FOCUSED ON ENGAGING DURING THE
TIME IN WHICH WE HAVE SOME
CONCEPT DESIGNS AND SOME
ALTERNATIVES TO THE SHOW TO GET
SOME MORE TO MORE LIKE ON THE
GROUND FEEDBACK FOR SOME
OF THESE THINGS.
>> OK, WONDERFUL.
WELL THANK YOU FOR CLARIFYING
AND I LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING
THOSE UPDATES RIGHT.
THANKS AGAIN TO TO THE TEAM FOR
COMING BY TONIGHT AND LIKE I
SAID, I'M SURE WE'LL SEE YOU
AGAIN LATER THIS YEAR OR NEXT
YEAR MAYBE WE'LL WORK WITH THE
TRANSPORTATION STAFF TO FIGURE
OUT A TIME THAT MAKES SENSE TO
TO HAVE YOU GUYS BACK SO BUT
THINK THANK YOU.
THANK YOU ALL FOR STICKING WITH
IT.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT THE INTEREST OF TIME
YOU'VE GOT STAFF REPORT AND
UPDATES.
WE HAVE TRANSPORTATION PROJECT
UPDATES AND THE CRASH REVIEW
TEAM REPORT.
SO CYNTHIA, TAKE IT AWAY.
>> YES.
AND AS YOU MENTIONED, IN THE
INTEREST OF TIME I WILL
ENDEAVOR TO BE QUITE SUCCINCT.
>> OK, SO I SHARING OUR UPDATED
TRANSPORTATION PROJECT UPDATES
DOCUMENT YOU WILL HAVE TWO
OF THESE DOCUMENTS IN YOUR
PACKET.
ONE IS FOR ALL THIS AS WE DO
NOT MEET IN AUGUST AND ONE IS
FOR SEPTEMBER.
THERE ARE A FEW FEATURES THAT I
WANT TO POINT OUT TO YOU AND
THEN I WILL LET YOU PERUSE
THESE ON YOUR OWN.
WE HAVE WE'VE UPDATED SO THAT
WE HAVE A DIFFERENT LAYOUT BUT
WE WANTED TO BE ABLE TO PROVIDE
YOU MORE INFORMATION.
THE KEY INFORMATION THAT WE
REALLY WANT TO BE PROVIDING
HERE FOR YOU IS LETTING YOU
KNOW WHAT WORK AREA THE PROJECT
IN WHAT WHAT AREA OF THE CITY
IS TAKING LEAD ON THAT PROJECT.
SO FOR INSTANCE, SAY
STREETSBORO TRANSPORTATION IS
THE LEAD.
WE'VE GIVEN YOU A LINK TO THE
ENGAGE BRIEF DESCRIPTION AND
SOME PROJECT UPDATES AND MOST
IMPORTANTLY WE WANTED TO MAKE
IT MORE ACCESSIBLE TO TIE ALL
OF OUR PROJECTS BACK TO OUR
PLANS.
>> KEY STRATEGIES THE LISTED
ACROSS THE TOP HERE YOU WILL
SEE THE KEY STRATEGIES THAT
ENGINEERING AND TRANSFER ARE
THE ARE PRIMARILY RESPONSIBLE
FOR AND YOU CAN SEE HOW THE
DIFFERENT PROJECTS LINE UP WITH
ALL OF THOSE KEY STRATEGIES.
I DON'T I DON'T KNOW IF ANYBODY
HAS ANY QUESTIONS ON THIS NEW
LAYOUT.
>> IF YOU DO I WOULD LIKE TO
ADDRESS THOSE.
MY INITIAL REACTION WAS I
REALLY, REALLY APPRECIATE IT.
>> THANK YOU.
I AM GLAD TO HEAR THAT AND I
WOULD ALSO LIKE TO POINT OUT
THAT OUR OUR GOAL IS THAT AS
THE PROJECT MOVES THROUGH ITS
LIFECYCLE TO BE ABLE TO UPDATE
THE PHOTOS SO LIKE FOR
INSTANCE, RIGHT HERE WE HAVE
NORTHMOOR AND WE HAVE AND THIS
IS WHAT NORTHMAN LOOKS LIKE
RIGHT NOW AS WE MOVE FROM STUDY
INTO A DESIGN, WE WOULD WANT TO
UPDATE A PICTURE THAT SHOWED
THE PROPOSED DESIGN AND AS IT
GOES INTO CONSTRUCTION BE ABLE
TO UPDATE OUT WITH CONSTRUCTION
PICTURE AND THEN WHEN THE
PROJECT IS COMPLETE HAVE AN
EXEMPLAR OF THE COMPLETED
PROJECT.
>> SO THAT IS SOME GOOD
INFORMATION FOR THERE.
I'M SORRY MY ZIMBABWES RIGHT ON
TOP OF MY CABINETS IS HAVING
STRUGGLE THERE.
SO AS I SAID WE HAVE WE HAVE
THE AUGUST WE HAVE THE
SEPTEMBER AND ALSO WE HAVE
AUGUST AND SEPTEMBER CRASH DATA
.
>> SO THIS IS OUR AUGUST CRASH
REVIEW TEAM REPORT AND WE HAD
ONE CRASH REVIEW IN AUGUST.
>> THAT CRASH WAS AT GREEN
NORTH AND EAST DAVIS NOW AND WE
HAVE SOME IDENTIFYING
INFORMATION FOR THE CASE.
NO, THIS OCCURRED ON JULY
TWENTY NINE AT TWO O'CLOCK IN
THE MORNING THERE WERE TWO
PARTIES INVOLVED.
THE ROADWAY IS STRAIGHT AND
LEVEL IS PAVED ASPHALT TWO
LANES ARE WEATHER CONDITIONS
WERE CLEAR AND DRY.
IT WAS DARK.
THERE IS SOME STREET LIGHTING
ON THAT SECTION OF GREEN AS
WELL.
A LITTLE BIT OF A DESCRIPTION
OF THE CRASH IS THAT PEDESTRIAN
WHO WAS TRAVELING NORTHBOUND ON
THE SIDEWALK FELL INTO THE
ROADWAY WHILE LYING IN THE
SOUTHBOUND LANE OF GREEN NORTH
OF EAST DAVIS.
THE PEDESTRIAN WAS STRUCK BY A
SOUTHBOUND VEHICLE.
THE VEHICLE FLED THE SCENE.
INVESTIGATION EFFORTS WERE
EXHAUSTED AND THEY EXHAUSTED
ALL OF THEIR LEADS AND THEY
WERE UNABLE TO LOCATE THE
VEHICLE OR DRIVER AND THE
PEDESTRIAN SUFFERED SIGNIFICANT
INJURIES BUT IS STABLE AND
RECOVERING.
>> SO WE HAVE NOT WE HAVE NOT
KETAN ANY OF OUR OF OUR HE
DANGEROUS BEHAVIORS THAT WE
NORMALLY TRACK AS WE DON'T HAVE
ENOUGH INFORMATION ON THE CRASH
AND THE BEHAVIOR THAT WE DID
WANT TO NOTE IS THAT IT WAS A
HIT AND RUN CRASH.
SO WE DO NOT HAVE ANY
ENFORCEMENT OR ENGINEERING
STRATEGIES LISTED HERE.
WE DID CHECK THE TEN YEAR CRASH
HISTORY AS THE PEDESTRIAN FELL
INTO THE STREET AND THERE'S
THERE WERE NO SIGNS THAT THE
SPEED WAS AN ISSUE AND OF ALL
THE WE DIDN'T HAVE A LOT
OF DATA BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE A
WITNESS AND WE DID NOT WE'RE
NOT ABLE TO TRACK THE DRIVER
DOWN.
>> ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE
REALLY DID THINK WOULD BE
IMPORTANT TO FOCUS ON COMING
OUT OF THIS IS GIVEN THAT THIS
IS ONE OF SEVERAL HIT AND RUN
CRASHES THAT WE'VE HAD THIS
YEAR.
>> WE'RE VERY INTERESTED IN
LOOKING TOWARDS MAKING THE
PUBLIC MORE AWARE OF WHAT
THEY'RE RESPONSIBILITIES AS
PART OF A CRASH ARE AND
IMPORTANT TO UNDERSTANDING THAT
WHAT SOME OF THEIR DECISIONS
CAN AND LEAD TO.
FOR INSTANCE, A HIT AND RUN IS
ACTUALLY A FELONY CHARGE.
SO IT'S REALLY IMPORTANT FOR
FOLKS TO UNDERSTAND THAT, YOU
KNOW, EVEN IF YOU WERE DRUNK
IT'S BETTER FOR YOU TO STAY
THAN IT IS FOR YOU TO LEAVE THE
CRASH AND AND BE FOUND LATER.
>> SO WE WE THINK IT WOULD BE
GREAT TO DO A MESSAGING
CAMPAIGN THAT IS CURRENTLY ON
FUNDED.
>> SO THAT IS OUR OUR AUGUST
CRASH REPORT.
DO WE HAVE ANY QUESTIONS
FOR
EVERYONE NICHOLLS RAISED?
>> OK, THANK YOU.
AND THEN MOVING ON TO OUR
SEPTEMBER CRASH REVIEW TEAM
REPORT.
>> BUT WE ALSO HAVE ONLY ONE
CRASH FOR SEPTEMBER THIS IS
ENORMOUSLY MIDLAKE CROSSING
NORTH OF OAK BROOK AND THE WAS
NOT AVAILABLE AT THE TIME
OF THE CRASH REVIEW AND IT WAS
ON AUGUST 19TH.
IT WAS AT TWELVE TWENTY NINE PM
WE ARE TWO PARTIES INVOLVED
ROADWAY CONDITIONS IT'S FIVE
CROSS SECTION RIGHT THERE.
>> THE CRASH DID OCCUR AT THE
MINDBLOWER CROSSING SO THAT IS
TWO NORTHBOUND LANES TO
SOUTHBOUND LANES THE CENTER
LEFT TURN LANE THERE IS A
PEDESTRIAN ISLAND AT THIS
LOCATION AND WE DO HAVE A
RECTANGULAR RAPID FLASHING
BEACON AS WELL AS ADVANCED
CARS.
>> BUT CONDITIONS WERE CLOUDY
AND DRY.
IT WAS DAYLIGHT AND THIS IS A
DUAL THREAT CRASH LOCATION.
SO THE VEHICLE VEHICLES WERE IN
THE WOODS IN THE SOUTHBOUND
SOUTHBOUND IN THE LEFT LANE.
SO TOWARDS THE CENTER OF THE
ROAD APPROACHING AND CROSSING
THERE WAS TRAFFIC SLIGHTLY
AHEAD INTO OUR RIGHT.
THE PEDESTRIAN WAS CROSSING
EASTBOUND IN MARKED CROSSWALK
ON AN ELECTRIC SCOOTER SCOOTER
WITNESSES THE WITNESS WAS WAS
IN A VEHICLE THAT WAS AHEAD AND
TO THE RIGHT OF THE STRIKING
VEHICLE AND THEY ADVISED THAT A
PEDESTRIAN PULLED UP TO THE
INTERSECTION, HIT THE BUTTON
TO
ACTIVATE THE RV AND IMMEDIATELY
PROCEEDED TO CROSS.
THE WITNESS WAS JUST ABLE TO
STOP BUT THE STRIKING VEHICLE
DID NOT.
>> SO DANGEROUS BEHAVIORS THAT
WE IDENTIFIED OUR FAILURE TO
YIELD AND DISREGARD TRAFFIC
CONTROL.
WE DID NOTE THAT THE FAILURE
THERE WAS FAILURE TO YIELD ON
MULTIPLE PARTIES SO ENFORCEMENT
CONCERNS THAT WERE IDENTIFIED
IS THE PEDESTRIAN VEHICLE
INTERACTION DANGER AS A MIDTERM
STRATEGY.
THEY ARE LOOKING FOR THE
POSSIBILITY OF DOING TARGETED
CROSSWALK ENFORCEMENT.
ANOTHER CAMPAIGN TARGETED
TOWARDS CROSSWALK ENFORCEMENT
THAT'S CURRENTLY UNFUNDED.
SO THAT IS SOMETHING THAT APD
IS LOOKING TOWARDS FINDING A
SOLUTION FOR AND ENGINEERING
AND PLANNING CONCERNS
IDENTIFIED ARE THE THREAT AT
THE MIDDLE CROSSING THE DRIVER
SPEED AND PEDESTRIAN ABILITY TO
JUDGE VEHICLE SPEED AND WHETHER
OR NOT THE VEHICLE COULD STOP
SO NEAR-TERM STRATEGIES WE HAVE
SOME PAVEMENT WORKING UPDATES
THAT WE'D LIKE TO PURSUE.
WE'RE LOOKING AT POSSIBLY
WIDENING THE LANE LINES,
INVESTIGATING AN APPLICATION
OF PERCEPTUAL MARKINGS TO SLOW
DRIVERS AND PEDESTRIANS
PEDESTRIANS TO WHAT THAT THAT
AREA THAT THEY NEED TO ALLOW
THAT A VEHICLE MAY NOT BE ABLE
TO STOP IN AND THAT'S WE HAVE
NOT DETERMINED WHAT THAT WOULD
ACTUALLY LOOK LIKE YET.
SO AN APPLICATION THAT YOU MAY
BE ALREADY FAMILIAR WITH ARE
SORT OF THE A LITTLE TICK MARKS
THAT ARE ON THE SIDES OF THE
ROAD.
WE USE THEM ON AIR TO HELP
DRIVERS SLOW DOWN AS THEY'RE
APPROACHING THOSE ROUNDABOUTS
SO SOMETHING ALONG THOSE LINES
BUT WE HAVE NOT COMPLETE A
DESIGN FOR THAT YET ANOTHER
NEAR-TERM STRATEGY IS OF COURSE
THE COUNCIL DIRECTED PROJECT AT
R2 WHICH YOU HEARD ABOUT THIS
EVENING AND THAT IS THAT'S NEAR
TERM AND MID-TERM STRATEGIES
FOR THIS LOCATION.
>> WE DO HAVE TWO PROJECTS THAT
ARE IN THE DC IP.
THE FIRST PROJECT IS IS OUR
RESURFACING PROJECT FOR THE
CORRIDOR.
THAT'S PART OF THAT RESURFACING
PROJECT WE'RE LOOKING AT
INSTALLING OVERHEAD OUR OUR
THESE SPEED MANAGEMENT AND
THERE ARE A LOT OF OTHER ITEMS
THAT ARE ALSO INCLUDED IN THAT
PROJECT.
YOU CAN FIND DETAILED
INFORMATION ABOUT THAT SCOPE IN
THE VIP, ALSO IN THE VIP NOT AS
CRITICAL TO THIS ACTUAL CRASH
OUTCOME IS CAWDOR STREET
LIGHTING PROJECT THAT PROJECTS
CURRENTLY UNFUNDED AND IT IS A
FEW YEARS OUT IN THE IP
EDUCATION RESPONSE.
>> WE ARE NOW CROSSWALKS AND
LOOKING NEAR TERM STRATEGY APD
AND CITY COMMUNICATIONS ARE
HAVE BEEN WORKING ON A LIST
OF SOCIAL MEDIA MESSAGES THAT
THEY WANT TO BRING OUT OVER THE
NEXT COUPLE OF MONTHS AND SOME
OF THOSE TOPICS WILL TOUCH ON
FACTORS THAT WERE INVOLVED IN
THIS CRASH AND MIDTERM STRATEGY
WOULD BE TO HAVE PEDESTRIAN AND
DRIVER EDUCATION CAMPAIGN THAT
IS PARTNERED WITH THAT
CROSSWALK ENFORCEMENT.
IT'S CURRENTLY UNFUNDED BUT
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT WE WOULD
LIKE TO LOOK TOWARDS MOVING
FORWARD IF WE CAN FIND FUNDING
FOR OUR 90 DAY UPDATE FOR THIS
PARTICULAR CRASH WILL OCCUR IN
DECEMBER AND THEN WE WILL HAVE
A ONE YEAR UPDATE NEXT
OCTOBER AND TO GIVE YOU ANY
UPDATES ON ANY OF THESE
STRATEGIES, DOES ANYONE HAVE
ANY QUESTIONS ABOUT THIS FIRST
OBSERVATION?
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR THE
THROUGH THE THOROUGH LOOK AT
THIS CRASH.
THIS IS REALLY EXCELLENT WORK
AND ONE OF THE THINGS I WANT TO
POINT OUT IS HOW THERE ARE
PROJECTS WE'RE ALREADY WORKING
ON A TWO HOUR TO AND SEEING A
CRASH LIKE THIS KIND OF AFFIRMS
OUR DECISION TO WORK ON THEM
LIKE WE'RE OBVIOUSLY ON THE
RIGHT TRACK IF IF WE CAN
PREVENT CRASHES LIKE THIS
THROUGH ACTIONS LIKE A TWO HOUR
TWO THE OTHER AND THEN
OBVIOUSLY THERE'S SOME THINGS
THAT WE DON'T HAVE PLANS FOR
THE OUTREACH THAT THAT UH THIS
KIND OF MAKES THE CASE FOR
GETTING THEM INTO THE BUDGET
THEN I GUESS THAT KIND MY ONE
OF MY QUESTIONS IS LIKE HOW DO
WE START SHOWING THAT WE NEED
UM, BUDGET FOR THINGS LIKE THE
CROSSWALK COMPLIANCE CAMPAIGN
FOR EXAMPLE, LIKE HOW DO WE HOW
DO WE MOVE THE NEEDLE ON THAT?
UM, THE OTHER THING I'D LIKE TO
OBSERVE IS THAT UM WHEN I SAW
THIS INTERSECTION THERE WAS A
LOT OF VEGETATION THAT HAD
GROWN AROUND THE RFP LIGHTS AND
I WROTE I SEE CLICK FIX ABOUT
IT A FEW DAYS AFTER THE CRASH
AND IT GOT THE VEGETATION GOT
REMOVED THE DAY AFTER THE QUICK
FIX WAS WRITTEN.
SO THIS WAS MAYBE A WEEK AFTER
THE CRASH HAPPENED BUT UM I
TOOK SOME PICTURES WITHIN A FEW
DAYS OF THAT CRASH HAPPENING
AND THE THE LIGHTS THE RFP WERE
DEFINITELY OBSCURED UM I MEAN I
CAN SHARE THOSE PICTURES WITH
YOU.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT IS
RELEVANT TO THIS CRASH BUT UM I
MEAN YOU CAN SEE THEM FOR
YOURSELF OR LOOK IN THE CLICK
FIX AND SEE THEM AND MAKE THAT
CALL.
BUT IT SEEMS LIKE IT MAY HAVE
BEEN A CONTRIBUTOR UM BASED ON
WHAT I SAW.
SO AGAIN, THANK YOU VERY MUCH
FOR THIS THOROUGH ANALYSIS.
I LEARNED.
>> YEAH.
I WANTED TO COME BACK TO THANK
YOU ALSO FOR THE TRANSPORT
MONTHLY UPDATE FORMAT.
I DO REALLY FIND THAT FORMAT
APPEALING COMING BACK TO THIS
SPECIFIC AUGUST CRASH REPORT.
IT'S INTERESTING I OBSERVED
LISTENING IN TO CITY COUNCILS
MEETING ON SEPTEMBER 15TH THAT
THIS INTERSECTION IS ACTUALLY
DISCUSSED IN RELATION TO THE
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT CALLED THE
CRESCENT.
SO I'M JUST CURIOUS BECAUSE
THIS WAS ACTUALLY A TOPIC WHERE
FOLKS WERE ASKING IF THE
DEVELOPER FOR THIS PROJECT
WOULD BE WILLING TO COMMIT TO A
TRAFFIC STUDY TO ASSESS THE
IMPORTANCE AND MORE IMPORTANTLY
THE NEED FOR TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY TO ASSESS POTENTIAL
PUTTING IN A TRAFFIC LIGHT.
SO I'M CURIOUS IF THIS FACTOR
MIGHT BE CONSIDERED IN RELATION
TO INFORMATION EMERGING FROM
THE CRASH REPORT.
YOU KNOW THAT PROJECT SORRY.
I'M SORRY.
IT'S ALSO A SEGWAY INTO F1.
WE WANT IT TO ADDRESS I KNOW
THAT HE'S ON PLANNING
COMMISSION AND I THINK THEY MAY
HAVE DISCUSSED THIS AS WELL BUT
SORRY SORRY TO INTERRUPT
CYNTHIA.
>> WELL, I WAS JUST GOING TO
SAY THAT PROJECT IS LARGE
ENOUGH THAT A MULTIMODAL
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS
WAS INCLUDED IN IN ITS
APPLICATION.
>> THEY WENT THROUGH A NUMBER
OF REVISIONS ON THAT
APPLICATION.
YOU CAN FIND ALL OF THAT
INFORMATION THROUGH THE STREAM
WEBSITE THE PUBLIC FACING THE
PORTAL FOR ALL OF THE SITE
PLANS AND YOU CAN FIND ALL
OF THE SITE PLANS, ALL OF THE
REVIEW.
I ENCOURAGE YOU TO LOOK AT THE
MOST RECENT SITE PLAN BECAUSE
THAT SHOWS THEIR COMMITMENT TO
A CROSSWALK AT INSTALLING A NEW
CROSSWALK AND THAT DESIGN HAS
NOT BEEN FINALIZED AT THIS
POINT.
SO WE ARE GOING TO BE LOOKING
AT WHAT THAT FINAL DESIGN WILL
LOOK LIKE AND WHERE EXACTLY
THAT WILL BE PLACED.
THERE IS A PLACEHOLDER ON THE
PLANS BUT WE WILL BE REVIEWING
THAT AS PART OF THEIR SITE.
>> SO IF THEY IF THEIR SITE
PLAN GETS APPROVED AND THAT
WILL THAT THAT DESIGN WILL NEED
TO BE COORDINATED WITH WHAT
WE'RE LOOKING TOWARDS IN OUR IN
OUR PLANS.
SO THAT IS ONE OF THE REASONS
WHY THE DETAILS ON THAT WILL BE
FIGURED OUT A LITTLE BIT LATER
IN THEIR PROCESS.
I APPRECIATE THAT.
SO WE'LL TAKE A LOOK AT THE
CONTENT STREAM.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU VERY DEAL FOR ALL THE
UPDATES AND I DEFINITELY WANT
TO LOOK AT THE PROJECT UPDATES
ON YOUR OWN TIME FOR ANY
QUESTIONS.
BRING THEM TO THE NEXT MEETING
HOPEFULLY LEVEL A BIT MORE TIME
TO DIG INTO THOSE MOVE.
LET'S MOVE ON TO A SOLID REPORT
SO ANY WHO SERVICE IS ON TO
ANOTHER BODY OR ORGANIZATION
ARE INVITED NOW TO PROVIDE A
REPORT AT THE ALBUM.
THIS IS A GOOD WAY TO SAY THAT
THAT OBVIOUSLY PLAN.
RIGHT?
I THINK IT'S IN BETWEEN IT'S
GOING TO THE SECOND READING
OF COUNSEL AND SO THERE'S ABOUT
A MONTH I THINK WHILE THE CIVIL
ENGINEERS ARE LOOKING AT
WHETHER IT DESERVES AN ISLAND
ETC. AT THE PLANNING COMMISSION
WE KIND OF TALKED ABOUT THAT
AND OBVIOUSLY THE PROJECT FOR
THIS IS FOR THE SORRY THE
GOLDBERG'S PROJECT, THE ONE
THAT'S ACROSS RIGHT FROM THE
WHOLE FOODS WE OFTEN TALK WE AT
PLANNING MISSION WE TALKED
ABOUT THE GRADE ISSUE KIND
OF SLOPES DOWNWARD AND SO I
THINK THEY ARE TAKING A CAREFUL
LOOK AT THAT.
BUT JUST FROM A TIMELINE
STANDPOINT, JUST SAY THAT I
THINK FOR COUNCIL MEMBER AKMAN
I THINK IT COMES BACK TO YOU IN
LIKE THREE WEEKS
, THREE AND A
HALF WEEKS OR SOMETHING LIKE
THAT.
>> SO THAT'S ABOUT THE TIME
THAT I HAVE AND FROM OUR
STANDPOINT THE I THINK IT'S
LIKE THREE HUNDRED UNITS OR
SOMETHING ALONG THOSE LINES BUT
WE THOUGHT THAT IT WAS A
WORTHWHILE CONSIDERATION TO SAY
THAT WE'RE GOING TO BE ABLE TO
INTRODUCE THREE HUNDRED
FAMILIES TO THE AREA.
>> RIGHT THAT AND THAT IT IS A
GOOD LAND USE POLICY FOR THAT
REZONING.
SO FROM STANDPOINT AND BY THE
WAY, JUST FOR I SAID AS A
PLANNING AS WELL I LIVE THERE
SO THAT IT IS ACTUALLY MY
BACKYARD.
I WALK MY DOG EVERY DAY AND
WHILE MY MY NEIGHBORS ARE LIKE
I DON'T LIKE THAT DOESN'T MEAN
WE HAVE TO FOLLOW THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND WE HAVE
TO DO WHAT'S IN THE BEST
INTEREST OF THE CITY.
SO BUT I DO KNOW THAT THAT
TRAFFIC IS THE ONE
CONSIDERATION THAT COUNCIL'S
TALKING ABOUT.
BUT JUST TO GIVE YOU THAT
CONTEXT OF THREE AND A HALF
WEEKS IS KIND OF WHAT YOU HAVE
TO TAKE A LOOK THAT SO ASIDE
FROM THAT OF I DON'T KNOW I'M
NOT SURE THAT THERE'S I DON'T
THINK THERE'S ANYTHING ELSE I
WANT TO POINT OUT.
>> THANK YOU, LEE.
WHAT ELSE COMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATIONS ANY
COMMISSIONERS ARE INVITED TO
PROVIDE ANY REPORTS OR UPDATES
AND BEFORE THAT A NORMALLY I DO
THIS AT THE AFTER ROLL CALL BUT
A LITTLE BIT TOO LATE.
BUT TO INTRODUCE OUR NEWEST
MEMBER TO THE COMMISSION LORD
DUNLAP LAST MONTH WOULD HAVE
BEEN YOUR FIRST MONTH AFTER
BEING NOMINATED AND APPROVED BY
CITY COUNCIL VOTE.
WE SKIP THAT MEETING SO WELCOME
WELCOME LAURA AND WE'RE VERY
HAPPY TO HAVE YOU.
I'M VERY HAPPY TO SEE THAT
YOU'VE ALREADY PASSED SOME GOOD
QUESTIONS AND EVERYTHING
TONIGHT SO AGAIN, WELCOME.
WE'RE HAPPY TO HAVE YOU ANY
OTHER COMMISSION?
>> NO COMMUNICATIONS ONE ROOM.
HEY BRAD.
SORRY I JUST TOTALLY FORGOT ON
THE MENTIONED ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT I WANT TO GIVE EVERYBODY A
HEADS UP ON THIS IS A
GEORGETOWN KIND OF YEAR THINK
LIKE STONE SCHOOL PACKER.
>> ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE
ARE I THINK HAVE APPROVED FOR
SITE PLAN IS THE THE INFILL AT
GEORGE AND SO WHERE THERE IS A
LARGE PARKING LOT IN THE SUN
THERE'S GOING TO BE FORTY SIX
UNITS ADDED TO THE CENTER OF IT
BRINGS A LITTLE BIT MORE I
GUESS PROXIMITY BRINGS THE
STRUCTURE CLOSER TO THE
STREETSCAPE SO HOPEFULLY IT
IMPROVES LEGIBILITY FOR ALL
MODES OF TRANSPORTATION BUT I
JUST WANTED TO GIVE EVERYBODY A
HEADS UP BUT THAT'S GOING TO BE
COMING FORWARD AND IT'S GOING
TO BRING SOME LEVEL OF RETAIL
SIX HUNDRED SQUARE FEET
OF RETAIL.
BUT AS YOU THINK ABOUT PACKER,
THERE'S GOING TO BE A LITTLE
BIT OF DENSIFICATION THERE.
BUT WE THINK THAT IT'S GOOD
BECAUSE I THINK THEY ONLY HAVE
ONE POINT TWO SPACES PER UNIT
AFTERWARDS.
SO IT WAS THE ELIMINATION
OF THE PARKING MINIMUMS THAT
ALLOWED THEM TO JUST BE ABLE TO
BUILD ON THE PARKING SPOTS
BECAUSE THEY WERE LIKE WE'RE
NOT ACTUALLY USING THESE SPOTS.
AND SO I THINK THAT WAS GOOD
POLICY THAT CREATES US GETS US
FORTY SIX ADDITIONAL UNITS.
BUT JUST HOPEFULLY FROM A
TRANSPORTATION STANDPOINT AS WE
LOOK THE PACARD CORRIDOR TO
KIND OF THINK THROUGH HOW
BUILDING LANDSCAPES ARE I'M
SORRY LIKE THE PROXIMITY OF THE
BUILDING TO THE STREETSCAPES
ALSO HELPS TO INFLUENCE A
DRIVER BEHAVIOR.
SO ANYWAY I JUST WANT TO GIVE
YOU A HEADS UP THAT WAS WHAT WE
DISCUSSED ALSO ON TUESDAY.
YOU ARE RIGHT.
THIS IS OUR MONTHLY CALL FOR
AGENDA ITEMS.
IF YOU HAVE ANY IDEAS FOR
TOPICS IN THE FUTURE AS ALWAYS,
PLEASE EMAIL OR COMMUNICATE
WITH US IN ANY WAY THAT'S
CONVENIENT TO PASS ALONG IDEAS
FOR AGENDA TOPICS PEOPLE DO
THAT REGULARLY AND IT'S VERY
HELPFUL.
CYNTHIA THANK YOU MR HARMONICA.
>> I ACTUALLY FORGOT I FORGOT
SOMETHING THAT I DID WANT TO
MENTION AS MENTIONED AS PART
OF OUR OUR UPDATES I WANTED TO
BRING YOUR ATTENTION TO THE
FACT THAT YOU RECEIVED A
COMMUNICATION THAT WAS
FORWARDED FROM THE ANYWHERE ON
THE SUSTAINED ENVIRONMENT AND
SUSTAINABILITY.
WHAT ARE THEY CALLING
THEMSELVES ABOUT JUST THE
SUSTAINABILITY THE
SUSTAINABILITY CONVENTION.
THANK YOU.
I WAS LIKE SUSTAINABILITY, THE
ENVIRONMENT THAT ROLLED INTO
SUSTAINABILITY THERE THEY HAVE
A DESIRE TO WORK ON A JOINT
STATEMENT BETWEEN THEIR
COMMISSION AND OUR COMMISSION
TO HELP PROVIDE A UNIFIED FRONT
WHEN WE ARE LOOKING AT ITEMS
SUCH THE BROCKMANN PROJECT THAT
WAS DISCUSSED EARLIER AND SO I
JUST WANT TO ENCOURAGE YOU TO
TAKE A LOOK AT THAT AND LET US
KNOW IF YOU NEED MORE
INFORMATION OR IF YOU HAVE AN
INTEREST IN BEING PART OF THAT
EFFORT.
THEY'RE REALLY LOOKING FOR
SOMEONE FROM THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION TO PARTICIPATE AND
HELP CRAFT THE STATEMENT THAT
WOULD THEN BE PROVIDED AS A
GREAT PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT PIECE
SO THAT WHEN WE'RE DOING OUR
PROJECTS WE CAN HAVE SOME SORT
OF STATEMENT THAT TALKS ABOUT
HOW WE LOOK AT TREES, HOW WE
LOOK AT EVERYTHING BEFORE WE
MAKE ANY DECISIONS TO BUILD
THINGS BASICALLY.
SO THEY'RE LOOKING FOR A JOINT
STATEMENT THAT WE CAN ALL AGREE
TO I THINK CHECK YOUR EMAILS.
I THINK ARIANNA SAID SOMETHING
TO THIS EFFECT IN THE LAST FEW
DAYS.
SO IF YOU HAVE ANY INTEREST AT
ALL, PLEASE REPLY BACK WITH A B
VERY HELPFUL AND ALSO GO BACK
TO COMMISSION COMMISSIONER
COMMUNICATION AND I THINK I
THINK THIS IS MELISA'S FIRST
MEETING.
I'VE MET MELISSA BEFORE IN
ANOTHER MEETING BUT I DON'T
THINK THE COMMISSION AT LARGE
HAS MET MELISSA.
SHE IS THE NEW TRANSPORTATION
MANAGER RIGHT.
AND WILL BE OBVIOUSLY CRITICAL
TO NOT JUST THIS COMMISSION
CITY GOING FORWARD.
SO IF YOU WANT TO SAY HI, I'M
SORRY I DIDN'T INTRODUCE
EARLIER JUST LIKE LAUREN I'M
HAPPY TO BE HERE.
IT'S BEEN A GREAT WEEK FOR I'M
STILL LEARNING A LOT SO WE'LL
GET THERE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANKS AGAIN.
ARE HAPPY TO HAVE YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
IF THERE ARE WELL LET'S SEE THE
NEXT MEETING I THINK WILL BE
HIGHROAD TILBURG THE TEAM TO
THOSE TWENTY FIVE TO SEVEN PM
THAT WILL ALSO BE A VIRTUAL
MEETING AND SO IF THERE ARE NO
OBJECTIONS WE WILL ADJOURN THIS
SEPTEMBER 17 MEETING SAYING
THEN THIS MEETING IS ADJOURNED.
THANK YOU